
			INTRODUCTION — Barrett's esophagus is the condition in which any extent of metaplastic columnar epithelium that predisposes to cancer development replaces the stratified squamous epithelium that normally lines the distal esophagus. The condition develops as a consequence of chronic gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), and predisposes to the development of adenocarcinoma of the esophagus.The issues related to the clinical manifestations and diagnosis of Barrett's esophagus will be reviewed here. The pathogenesis, malignant transformation, and management of this disorder, including surveillance for adenocarcinoma, are discussed separately. (See "Pathogenesis of Barrett's esophagus and its malignant transformation" and "Management of Barrett's esophagus".)EPIDEMIOLOGY — Barrett's esophagus is usually discovered during endoscopic examinations of middle-aged and older adults whose mean age at the time of diagnosis is approximately 55 years [1]. Although Barrett's esophagus can affect children, it rarely occurs before the age of five [2]. This observation supports the contention that Barrett's esophagus is an acquired condition, not a congenital one. Barrett's esophagus appears to be uncommon in blacks and Asians. Data on the prevalence in Hispanics are contradictory, with some studies showing a similar prevalence to that in Caucasians [3], and others showing a lesser prevalence [4,5]. The male to female ratio is approximately 2:1 [6]. Obesity is a risk factor for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and may be a risk factor for Barrett's esophagus [7,8]. A 2009 meta-analysis that included 11 observational studies demonstrated a small increase in the risk of Barrett's esophagus in patients with a body mass index (BMI) >30 kg/m2 as compared with patients with a BMI <30 kg/m2 (OR 1.4, 95% CI 1.1-1.6) [7]. However, other studies have suggested that rather than BMI, abdominal obesity as measured by a high waist to hip ratio (≥0.9 in males and ≥0.85 in females) is associated with an increase in risk of Barrett's esophagus [8-11].It is unclear if the use of aspirin or nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), by inhibition of COX-2 expression, is associated with a decrease in the risk of Barrett's esophagus [12-14]. In a single institution case-controlled study of 434 patients, current aspirin but not other NSAID was associated with a decreased risk of Barrett's esophagus (OR 0.56, 95% CI 0.39-0.80) [12]. However, a large-population based, case-controlled study failed to demonstrate an association with aspirin use and Barrett's esophagus; and the use of non-aspirin NSAIDs was associated with only a small decrease in risk of Barrett's esophagus (OR 0.69, 95% CI 0.49-0.97) [13].Estimates of the prevalence of Barrett's esophagus in the general population have varied widely ranging from 0.4 to more than 20 percent depending in part upon the population studied and the definitions used [15-19]. The following studies illustrate the range of findings:●A study from Sweden estimated that Barrett's esophagus was present in 1.6 percent of the general population [20]. Applying these prevalence estimates to the United States would translate into about 3.3 million individuals with Barrett's esophagus [21]. An important additional observation from this report was that 44 percent of patients lacked "troublesome heartburn and/or acid regurgitation during the past three months" suggesting that screening programs based upon reflux symptoms alone may be inadequate to identify patients with Barrett's esophagus.●In a study conducted in the United States, the prevalence of Barrett's esophagus was 6.8 percent among 961 patients undergoing a colonoscopy [22]. Among 556 patients who had never had heartburn, the prevalence was 5.6 percent. Among 384 subjects with a history of heartburn, the prevalence was 8.3 percent. Most cases were "short-segment". Long-segment Barrett's was especially uncommon in those without a history of heartburn. (See 'Differences between long- and short-segment Barrett's' below.)●Among patients who have endoscopic examinations because of chronic GERD symptoms, long-segment Barrett's esophagus can be found in 3 to 5 percent, whereas 10 to 15 percent have short-segment Barrett's esophagus (see 'Differences between long- and short-segment Barrett's' below) [23,24]. Familial aggregation of Barrett's esophagus has been described [25,26]. It is unclear if this is due to common environmental exposures and/or an inherited predisposition. Germline mutations in the MSR1, ASCC1, and CTHRC1 genes have been associated with the presence of Barrett's esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma [27]. However, large cohort studies are needed to validate these findings.The sensitivity of endoscopy for detection of Barrett's is related to the length of involved mucosa, with detection being more likely in patients who have long-segment Barrett's (see 'Differences between long- and short-segment Barrett's' below) [28]. The overall reliability of endoscopy with biopsy for detection of specialized intestinal metaplasia in Barrett's esophagus is approximately 80 percent. This was illustrated in a study that included 116 patients who were involved in a Veterans Administration Cooperative Study that required two endoscopies six weeks apart [29]. Barrett's esophagus was confirmed by biopsy in only one of the two endoscopies in 20 percent of patients.CLINICAL FEATURES — The specialized intestinal columnar metaplasia typical of Barrett's esophagus causes no symptoms. Most patients are seen initially for symptoms of associated gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), such as heartburn, regurgitation, and dysphagia. (See "Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux in adults".)GERD associated with long-segment Barrett's esophagus frequently is complicated by esophageal ulceration, stricture, and hemorrhage (image 1 and picture 1) [1]. In patients with symptomatic GERD, erosive esophagitis is an independent risk factor for Barrett's esophagus, conferring a fivefold increased risk of Barrett's at five-year follow-up (relative risk ratio [RRR] 5.2; 95% CI 1.2-22.9) [30]. Some studies have suggested that patients with a peptic stricture have a higher prevalence of Barrett's esophagus than those without strictures. This relationship is not surprising since both peptic stricture and Barrett's esophagus are associated with more severe GERD. However, this association has been challenged in a study of patients referred for endoscopy for GERD in whom the prevalence of intestinal metaplasia was the same in patients with and without strictures [31].CANCER INCIDENCE — The incidence of cancer arising in Barrett's esophagus is described separately. (See "Management of Barrett's esophagus", section on 'Influence of Barrett's esophagus on mortality'.)DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA — Endoscopic examination generally is required to diagnose Barrett's esophagus [24]. Two criteria must be fulfilled:●The endoscopist must document that columnar epithelium lines the distal esophagus.●Histologic examination of biopsy specimens from that columnar epithelium must reveal intestinal metaplasia. Some data suggest that gastric cardiac-type epithelium in the esophagus also might predispose to cancer and thus might be considered "Barrett's esophagus," but most authorities still require the presence of intestinal metaplasia for an unequivocal diagnosis [32,33].To document that columnar epithelium lines the esophagus, the endoscopist must identify both the squamocolumnar and gastroesophageal junctions [34]. Columnar epithelium has a reddish color and velvet-like texture on endoscopic examination, whereas squamous epithelium has a pale, glossy appearance (picture 2). The juxtaposition of these epithelia at the squamocolumnar junction forms a visible line called the Z-line.In contrast, the gastroesophageal junction is the imaginary line at which the esophagus ends and the stomach begins anatomically. The gastroesophageal junction can be defined endoscopically as the level of the most proximal extent of the gastric folds [33].When the squamocolumnar and gastroesophageal junctions coincide (figure 1), the entire esophagus is lined by squamous epithelium. When the squamocolumnar junction is located proximal to the gastroesophageal junction (GEJ) (figure 2), there is a columnar-lined segment of esophagus. If biopsy specimens from that segment show specialized intestinal metaplasia, then the patient has Barrett's esophagus. The condition is called long-segment Barrett's esophagus when the distance between the Z-line and the GEJ is ≥3 cm, and short-segment Barrett's esophagus when that distance is <3 cm [35]. If the Z-line and the GEJ coincide and biopsy specimens at the Z-line show intestinal metaplasia, the condition is called intestinal metaplasia at the GEJ [36].Although these diagnostic criteria are widely accepted, they are not ideal. There can be significant interobserver variability in defining the length of Barrett's esophagus, which may in part be caused by the variable configuration that Barrett's esophagus can have and the presence of a hiatus hernia (figure 3) [37]. Furthermore, intestinal metaplasia may not always be apparent on endoscopy. In one study, the positive predictive value of endoscopy for the presence of intestinal metaplasia was only 34 percent; correct diagnosis was more likely in patients with long-segment Barrett's esophagus [28].In some Asian countries (particularly Japan) the GEJ is defined as the distal end of the lower esophageal palisade vessels (rather than the upper end of the gastric longitudinal folds). However, one study found that using the palisade vessels had lower interobserver reliability (kappa coefficient of only 0.14) than using the gastric folds as a landmark (kappa coefficient of 0.35) [38]. The low interobserver reliability of both approaches underscores the difficulty in achieving an optimal method of assessing the length of Barrett's esophagus.An endoscopic grading system (The Prague C & M Criteria) has been recommended for assessing the presence and extent of Barrett's esophagus [33,39]. The criteria are based upon assessment of the circumferential extent (the C value) and maximum extent (the M value) of metaplastic epithelium above the GEJ (C value = Depth of endoscope insertion from the circumferential extent of suspected columnar epithelium - Depth of endoscope insertion at the GE junction; M value= Depth of endoscope insertion from the maximal extent of columnar epithelium - Depth of endoscope insertion at the GE junction). A validation study found that the criteria had good interobserver reliability for Barrett's esophagus, but the clinical value of using this grading system is not clear [39,40].Intestinal metaplasia at the GEJ and in the gastric cardia — Traditional teaching holds that the normal Z-line is a junction between esophageal squamous epithelium and gastric cardiac-type epithelium, a columnar lining characterized by tortuous, tubular glands comprised of mucus-secreting cells and devoid of acid-secreting parietal cells [36,37]. It was previously believed that cardiac-type epithelium can line up to 2 cm of the most distal esophagus, and may extend several centimeters below the GEJ to line the most proximal stomach (the gastric cardia) [37,41]. However, more recent data indicate that this traditional teaching is incorrect, and that cardiac-type epithelium usually extends only 1 or 2 mm beyond the Z-line. Furthermore, some authorities now contend that the normal Z-line is a junction between esophageal squamous and gastric fundic (oxyntic) epithelia, and that cardiac-type epithelium is an abnormal, metaplastic mucosa acquired as a consequence of chronic inflammation in the distal esophagus caused by gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) [42,43].A study of 40 patients who had subtotal esophagectomy with esophagogastrostomy, an operation frequently complicated by severe reflux esophagitis in the esophageal remnant, supports the notion that cardiac-type epithelium is metaplastic [44]. Endoscopic examinations performed at a median of 36 months postoperatively showed that 19 of the 40 patients had developed columnar metaplasia in the esophageal remnant (10 cardiac-type epithelium, 9 intestinal metaplasia). Seven patients who had serial endoscopic examinations showed progression from cardiac-type epithelium on the initial postoperative endoscopy to specialized intestinal metaplasia on subsequent studies. The median time to the development of cardiac-type epithelium was 14 months, whereas specialized intestinal metaplasia was found at a median of 27 months postoperatively. These findings suggest that cardiac epithelium is not only metaplastic, but also the precursor of intestinal metaplasia in the esophagus.Intestinal metaplasia can develop in the stomach as a consequence of chronic H. pylori gastritis. Histologically, intestinal metaplasia in the stomach can be indistinguishable from intestinal metaplasia in the esophagus. Since the GEJ cannot be identified with great precision, it can be difficult to determine whether short segments of intestinal metaplasia found in the GEJ region are lining the esophagus (short-segment Barrett's esophagus) or the proximal stomach (intestinal metaplasia of the gastric cardia). As discussed above, the term "intestinal metaplasia at the GEJ" is used to describe the condition in which intestinal metaplasia is found at a Z-line that appears to coincide precisely with the GEJ. Rather than constituting an independent condition, intestinal metaplasia at the GEJ almost certainly represents either very short-segment Barrett's esophagus or intestinal metaplasia of the gastric cardia. These conditions cannot be distinguished reliably because the morphological and histochemical features of gastric and esophageal intestinal metaplasia are similar, and because the gross landmarks used to identify the GEJ do not have the precision necessary to localize a mucosa whose extent may be measured in only millimeters.Circumstantial evidence suggests that the risk of malignancy is substantially higher for intestinal metaplasia in the esophagus than for that in the stomach. As an example, one study found that both the prevalence and incidence of dysplasia (the precursor of malignancy) were significantly higher in patients with short-segment Barrett's esophagus than in those with intestinal metaplasia of the gastric cardia [45]. However, in a population-based cohort study, subjects with intestinal metaplasia at the GEJ appeared to have substantially lower rates of progression to esophageal adenocarcinoma than those with Barrett's esophagus (0 percent compared to 7 percent at 10 years) [46].Medical societies recommend endoscopic cancer surveillance routinely for patients with Barrett's esophagus, but not for patients with intestinal metaplasia in the stomach. As a result, the distinction between these two conditions has important clinical implications. A number of markers have been proposed to differentiate intestinal metaplasia of the cardia from short-segment Barrett's esophagus such as the pattern of cytokeratin staining and the presence of colonic-type sulfomucins. However, the utility of biomarkers in distinguishing short-segment Barrett's esophagus from intestinal metaplasia of the gastric cardia has not been established and, for now, clinical decisions should not be based on the presence of these biomarkers. For patients found to have intestinal metaplasia at the GEJ, a conservative management approach is to assume a worst-case scenario in which the condition is considered to represent short-segment Barrett's esophagus.Differences between long- and short-segment Barrett's — As discussed above, the prevalence of short-segment Barrett's esophagus is substantially higher than long-segment Barrett's esophagus. Both conditions are diagnosed most frequently in patients age 55 years and older, and are predominantly seen in male Caucasians.These observations were illustrated in a study that included 889 patients undergoing upper endoscopy who had protocol biopsies obtained at the esophagogastric junction [15]. The overall prevalence of specialized intestinal metaplasia was 13.2 percent with the following distribution:●Long-segment – 1.6 percent●Short-segment – 6.4 percent●Intestinal metaplasia at the GEJ – 5.6 percentPatients with long and short-segment Barrett's were predominantly male and white. Patients with short-segment Barrett's had a shorter history of heartburn and many had no GERD symptoms at all. In contrast, those with intestinal metaplasia of the GEJ had a similar gender distribution and were more likely to be infected by Helicobacter pylori.The degree and mechanism of acid exposure in patients with short- and long-segment Barrett's esophagus suggest that patients who develop long-segment Barrett's were predisposed to more severe reflux [47]:●Patients with long-segment Barrett's tend to have upright and supine reflux in contrast to those with short-segment Barrett's who have predominantly upright reflux●Proximal esophageal acid exposure is more common in patients with long-segment Barrett's●Compared with patients with long-segment Barrett's, those with short-segments tend to have higher LES pressures and higher distal esophageal peristaltic amplitudesDysplasia and adenocarcinoma in short-segment Barrett's — The risk of dysplasia and adenocarcinoma in patients with short-segment Barrett's esophagus is being clarified. It appears that patients with short-segment Barrett's have a lower incidence of dysplasia since less mucosa is involved [15,48,49]. Similarly, the risk of adenocarcinoma has been estimated to be 2 to 15 times higher in patients with long-segment Barrett's. The following three studies illustrate the range of findings:●In one study, the prevalence and incidence of dysplasia and adenocarcinoma were compared between 78 patients with long-segment and 74 patients with short-segment Barrett's esophagus [49]. At diagnosis, the prevalence of dysplasia was significantly higher in those with long-segment (24 versus 8 percent). Adenocarcinoma was detected only in patients with long-segment Barrett's. During follow-up ranging from 12 to 40 months, dysplasia developed significantly more often in patients with long-segment Barrett's (8 versus 4 percent). No patients with short-segment Barrett's developed high grade esophageal dysplasia or adenocarcinoma.●In another report that included 94 patients with intestinal metaplasia discovered during endoscopy, dysplasia or cancer were significantly more common in those with long-segment Barrett's compared with short-segment Barrett's or intestinal metaplasia of the esophagogastric junction (31, 10, and 6 percent, respectively) [15].●A third study included 309 patients with Barrett's esophagus who were followed for an average of 3.8 years [50]. A nonsignificant trend toward an increased risk of adenocarcinoma was observed with longer lengths of Barrett's; a 5 cm difference in segment length was associated with a 1.7-fold increased cancer risk.Although these retrospective data suggest that the risk of cancer for patients with short-segment Barrett's esophagus is less than that for patients with long-segment disease, there is yet no unequivocal proof for this contention. As a result, patients with short- and long-segment Barrett's esophagus presently are managed similarly. (See "Management of Barrett's esophagus".)SCREENING PATIENTS FOR BARRETT'S ESOPHAGUS — To decrease mortality from esophageal adenocarcinoma, it has been proposed that patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) symptoms should be screened endoscopically for Barrett's esophagus [51,52]. Consistent with the American Gastroenterological Association guidelines, we recommend against screening the general population of patients with GERD for Barrett's esophagus, and instead recommend screening only for patients with multiple risk factors for adenocarcinoma including chronic GERD, hiatal hernia, age ≥50, male gender, white race, elevated body mass index, and intra-abdominal body fat distribution [33].However, it is not clear that screening patients with GERD symptoms reliably identifies individuals at high risk for esophageal adenocarcinoma or has an impact on mortality. Long-segment Barrett's esophagus can be found in 3 to 5 percent of patients who have endoscopy for chronic GERD symptoms, whereas 10 to 15 percent have short-segment Barrett's esophagus [24]. Studies have also shown that patients with GERD symptoms are at increased risk for esophageal adenocarcinoma:●A meta-analysis of five case-control studies with 1189 patients with esophageal adenocarcinoma and 4666 controls found that patients with weekly GERD symptoms were more likely than patients with less frequent symptoms or without symptoms to develop esophageal adenocarcinoma (odds ratio 4.9) [53]. The odds of developing esophageal adenocarcinoma were even higher in patients with daily symptoms (OR 7.4).However, whether to screen patients with GERD symptoms not only needs to take into account the relative risk of developing esophageal adenocarcinoma, but also the absolute risk. The impact of the incidence of esophageal adenocarcinoma on screening was evaluated using a Markov model based upon age- and sex-specific incidences of esophageal adenocarcinoma in American non-Hispanic whites with GERD symptoms [54]. The study noted that the overall incidence of esophageal adenocarcinoma is low, but increases with age:●For men between the ages of 30 and 80 years, the incidence ranged from 0.1 to 15.4/100,000 for those without GERD or with GERD less than once per week, and from 0.4 to 75.9/100,000 for those with GERD at least once per week. ●For women between the ages of 30 and 80 years, the rates were lower, ranging from 0 to 2.3/100,000 for those without GERD or with GERD less than once per week, and from 0 to 11.2/100,000 for those with GERD at least once per week.●Of note, the incidence of esophageal adenocarcinoma for men without GERD was higher than the incidence for women with GERD at any given age (eg, at age 60 years the incidence in men without GERD was 7.0/100,000 and the incidence in women with GERD was 3.9/100,000).Another limitation of screening patients with GERD symptoms for Barrett's esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma is that more than 40 percent of patients with esophageal adenocarcinoma have no history of heartburn [53,55]. Thus, any screening program that targets only patients with heartburn can have only limited impact on cancer mortality rates and there is little evidence that these programs have prevented deaths from esophageal adenocarcinoma. In published series of patients found to have these tumors, fewer than 5 percent were known to have had Barrett's esophagus before they presented with symptoms of esophageal cancer [56].It is also not clear that patients who are known to have Barrett's esophagus benefit from surveillance and, once the diagnosis of Barrett's esophagus has been established, patients are subject to the worry about the diagnosis, the inconvenience and risk associated with surveillance and, potentially, a financial burden from an increase in life insurance premiums [57]. (See "Management of Barrett's esophagus".)Guidelines — Multiple societies have issued guidelines regarding screening patients for Barrett's esophagus [33,52,58,59]. It is important to appreciate that these recommendations represent the opinions of committees, that the recommendations of different societies vary, and that none of these approaches has been proven effective in clinical studies. American Gastroenterological Association — The American Gastroenterological Association (AGA) recommends screening patients with multiple risk factors associated with esophageal adenocarcinoma for Barrett's esophagus [33]. Risk factors considered by the AGA include:●Age 50 years or older●Male sex●White race●Chronic GERD●Hiatal hernia●Elevated body mass index●Intra-abdominal distribution of body fatThe AGA recommends against screening the general population with GERD.American College of Gastroenterology — The American College of Gastroenterology guidelines on the diagnosis and management of GERD state that upper endoscopy is not required in the presence of typical GERD symptoms [60]. Upper endoscopy is recommended in the presence of alarm symptoms (eg, dysphagia, weight loss, signs of gastrointestinal bleeding) and for screening of patients at high risk for complications (including Barrett's esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma). American College of Physicians — The Clinical Guidelines Committee of the American College of Physicians suggests that upper endoscopy may be indicated for screening for Barrett's esophagus in men older than 50 years with GERD symptoms for more than five years and the following additional risk factors [58]:●Nocturnal reflux symptoms●Hiatus hernia●Elevated body mass index●Tobacco use●Intra-abdominal distribution of fatAlternate screening methods — Nonendoscopic methods for screening are also being studied. One method uses a device called a capsule sponge (Cytosponge, Surepath; BD Diagnostics, Durham, NC) combined with an immunohistochemical biomarker (trefoil factor 3) [61]. The patient ingests a gelatin capsule that is attached to a string and contains a compressed mesh. The mesh is exposed when the gelatin capsule dissolves in the stomach. The mesh is then withdrawn through the esophagus where it collects samples of the cells lining the esophageal lumen. The biomarker is then used to differentiate Barrett's epithelial cells from gastric cardia and squamous cells.In a study of 504 patients who had used acid suppressing therapy for more than three months during the preceding five years, 501 (99 percent) were able to swallow the capsule [61]. The results obtained with the capsule sponge were compared with upper endoscopy for diagnosing Barrett's esophagus. The capsule sponge had a sensitivity of 73 percent and a specificity of 94 percent for patient with at least 1 cm of circumferential Barrett's esophagus. For patients with segments of 2 cm or more the sensitivity was 90 percent and the specificity was 94 percent.While newer technologies may allow for the detection of Barrett's esophagus using less invasive means, the question remains as to whether screening and subsequent surveillance are beneficial for patients.INFORMATION FOR PATIENTS — UpToDate offers two types of patient education materials, "The Basics" and "Beyond the Basics." The Basics patient education pieces are written in plain language, at the 5th to 6th grade reading level, and they answer the four or five key questions a patient might have about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who want a general overview and who prefer short, easy-to-read materials. Beyond the Basics patient education pieces are longer, more sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are written at the 10th to 12th grade reading level and are best for patients who want in-depth information and are comfortable with some medical jargon.Here are the patient education articles that are relevant to this topic. We encourage you to print or e-mail these topics to your patients. (You can also locate patient education articles on a variety of subjects by searching on "patient info" and the keyword(s) of interest.) ●Basics topics (see "Patient information: Barrett's esophagus (The Basics)" and "Patient information: Upper endoscopy (The Basics)")●Beyond the Basics topics (see "Patient information: Barrett's esophagus (Beyond the Basics)" and "Patient information: Upper endoscopy (Beyond the Basics)")SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS●Barrett's esophagus is usually discovered during endoscopic examinations of middle-aged and older adults whose mean age at the time of diagnosis is approximately 55 years. The specialized intestinal columnar metaplasia typical of Barrett's esophagus causes no symptoms. Most patients are seen initially for symptoms of associated gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), such as heartburn, regurgitation, and dysphagia. (See 'Epidemiology' above.)●Two criteria must be fulfilled to make a diagnosis of Barrett's esophagus: (See 'Diagnostic criteria' above.)•The endoscopist must document that columnar epithelium lines the distal esophagus.•Histologic examination of biopsy specimens from that columnar epithelium must reveal specialized intestinal metaplasia. Some data suggest that gastric cardiac-type epithelium in the esophagus also might predispose to cancer and thus might be considered "Barrett's esophagus," but most authorities still require the presence of specialized intestinal metaplasia for an unequivocal diagnosis.●It has been proposed that patients with GERD symptoms should be screened endoscopically for Barrett's esophagus. We suggest that patients with multiple risk factors for esophageal adenocarcinoma undergo screening for Barrett's esophagus. However, the evidence supporting this recommendation is weak, and we feel that decisions on when to recommend endoscopic screening should be individualized. Factors known to increase the risk for Barrett's esophagus include white ethnicity, older age, obesity (especially central obesity), and long duration of GERD symptoms. (See 'Screening patients for Barrett's esophagus' above.)
		
