
			INTRODUCTION — Subungual hematoma (blood under the fingernail or toenail), a common childhood injury, is usually caused by a blow to the distal phalanx (eg, crush in a door jamb, stubbing one's toe). The blow causes bleeding of the nail bed with resultant subungual hematoma formation. Patients complain of throbbing pain and blue-black discoloration under the nail as the hematoma progresses. Pain is relieved immediately for most patients with simple nail trephination.The trephination of subungual hematomas (ie, making a hole in the nail for drainage of blood) with intact nail fold and minimal nail or digit disruption is discussed here. The evaluation and management of distal phalanx fractures and finger tip injuries are discussed elsewhere. (See "Distal phalanx fractures" and "Management of fingertip injuries".)DEFINITIONS — Subungual hematoma refers to blood that is trapped under the nail after trauma. Subungual hematomas may be simple (ie, the nail and nail fold are intact) or accompanied by significant injuries to the nail fold and digit (eg, fingertip avulsion) [1,2].Trephination of a subungual hematoma consists of placing one or more holes in the nail to permit drainage of blood.ANATOMY — Subungual hematomas may be simple (ie, the nail and nail fold are intact) or accompanied by significant injuries to the nail fold and digit (eg, fingertip avulsion) [1,2]. The nail matrix is the tissue under the base of the nail that permits nail growth and migration. Its longitudinal fibers anchor the dermis to the periosteum of the distal phalanx [3]. The matrix begins 7 to 8 mm under the proximal fold, and its distal end is the white crescent called the lunula. Scarring of the matrix, as occurs with nail trauma, can disrupt nail growth and lead to nail deformity or permanent loss of the nail (figure 1).The richly vascularized nail bed lies directly beneath the plate to provide adherence and support and is the basis of the characteristic pink color. The proximal and lateral nail folds surround the plate on three sides. The cuticle, an outgrowth of the proximal fold, provides a seal between the fold and the nail plate (figure 1) [1].When a subungual hematoma occurs, the source of pain is pressure in a contained space pressing against nerve fibers and not from the soft tissue injury or bony injury alone.INDICATIONS — The medical provider should trephine subungual hematomas that are acute (less than 24 to 48 hours old), are not spontaneously draining, are associated with intact nail folds, and painful. In our experience, after 48 hours, most subungual hematomas have clotted and trephination is typically not effective.Indications for subspecialty consultation or referral — Most simple subungual hematomas can be managed by the emergency or primary care provider. The clinician should consult a hand surgeon, whenever possible, if there is concern related to permanent deformity or loss of finger function, including patients with:●Displaced fractures ●Intraarticular fractures ●Extensive nail bed injury●Infected woundsIndications for subspecialty consultation for patients with subungual hematomas and significant fingertip injuries are provided separately. (See "Management of fingertip injuries", section on 'Indications for subspecialty consultation or referral'.)CONTRAINDICATIONS AND PRECAUTIONS — Prior to trephination, the clinician should differentiate subungual hematoma from other conditions that have similar appearance. In many instances, there will be no history of antecedent trauma in these diseases, and the lesions will not be painful:●Subungual melanoma – A subungual melanoma typically starts as a painless darkly pigmented band in the matrix and extends the length of the nail. It may be associated with pigment deposition in the periungual skin (Hutchinson’s sign) (picture 1). (See "Initial surgical management of melanoma of the skin and unusual sites", section on 'Subungual'.)●Junctional nevus – A junctional nevus is composed of nests of melanocytes at the dermal-epidermal border. It appears as a painless dark spot in the nail bed or matrix. (See "Acquired melanocytic nevi (moles)", section on 'Terminology'.)●Splinter hemorrhages – Splinter hemorrhages can be seen with psoriasis or be associated with infectious endocarditis (picture 2). (See "Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of infective endocarditis", section on 'History and physical examination'.)●Subungual keratoacanthoma – This tumor of the fingers and toes typically presents rapidly with pain, swelling, and inflammation. (See "Keratoacanthoma: Epidemiology, risk factors, and diagnosis", section on 'Clinical variants'.)●Subungual epithelioma – This low grade malignancy is diagnosed by histologic exam.●Subungual glomus tumor – A rare benign neoplasm arising from the glomus body and mainly found under the nail, on the fingertip or in the foot, subungual glomus tumors appear as red, purple, or blue lesions under the nail plate and may cause paroxysmal pain, cold sensitivity, and tenderness (picture 3A-B). (See "Overview of nail disorders", section on 'Glomus tumor'.)PREPARATIONEvaluation — The involved digit should be evaluated for neurovascular compromise and inspected for evidence of nail fold disruption, deformity, or avulsion. Specific assessment of the extensor tendon for evidence of tendon disruption at the DIP joint (mallet finger) (picture 4 and figure 2) should also occur. (See "Extensor tendon injury of the distal interphalangeal joint (mallet finger)" and "Extensor tendon injury of the distal interphalangeal joint (mallet finger)", section on 'Symptoms and examination findings'.) We suggest obtaining radiographs in all patients with large subungual hematomas that occupy >50 percent of the nail plate because associated fractures are common with these injuries. (See "Distal phalanx fractures", section on 'Symptoms and physical examination' and "Management of fingertip injuries", section on 'Evaluation'.)Patient counseling/informed consent — The child or adult with subungual hematoma is typically anxious and in significant pain. The patient and family should receive an explanation of the problem and the planned approach. Anxiety usually recedes once the child's pain is adequately controlled. A child life specialist or other personnel may help with distracting the child during the procedure.In general, the benefit of any of the trephination procedures outweighs the risk. The adverse effects of the technique should be disclosed prior to the initiation of the procedure based on the planned approach including [4]:●Oozing of blood from the site of trephination●Pain caused by pressure against or contact with the nail bed during the procedure●Discoloration of the nail lasting up to four weeks●Potential loss of the nail despite trephination related to the primary injury●Potential for clotting to plug the nail hole, leading to reaccumulation of blood●Secondary infection of the nail bed and deeper structures (rare)Materials — The clinician should assemble all equipment prior to the procedure:●Infectious material precautions: latex-free gloves, eye protection, surgical mask●25 gauge or smaller (eg, 27 gauge) needle and 3 to 5 mL syringe for lidocaine injection (if digital nerve block is planned)●1 percent lidocaine WITHOUT epinephrine or 0.25 percent bupivicaine (if digital nerve block is planned) (see 'Analgesia and sedation' below and "Infiltration of local anesthetics")●Topical antiseptic (eg, povidone-iodine solution)●Sterile gauzeTrephination using cautery●Electrocautery device or carbon laser [5,6]Trephination using a boring technique●Double bevel 23 gauge or single bevel 18 gauge needle [4,7]OR●Insulin syringe needle (29 gauge) [8]OR●Mesoscission device (eg, PathFormer) (picture 5) [9]Choice of device — We suggest that patients with simple subungual hematomas undergo trephination by methods that avoid significant compression of the nail against the nail bed, such as cautery using an electrocautery device or carbon laser, aspiration with an insulin syringe needle (distal nail subungual hematomas only), or a mesoscission device rather than by boring through the nail with a needle. No studies have compared the benefits or risks of the different methods for trephination of subungual hematomas.The clinician should not use a heated paper clip as a cautery device because it requires an open flame to heat the material. In addition, many paper clips are now made of metals (eg, aluminum) that are difficult to heat sufficiently to successfully penetrate the nail [4]. In contrast, electrocautery devices are widely available and effective.Analgesia and sedation — As long as the clinician takes great care not to contact the nail bed during the procedure or to apply excessive pressure to the nail, nail trephination is typically painless because there are no nerve endings in the nail plate, and the hematoma provides a layer of separation from the nail bed which protects it from injury (figure 3).However, any pressure may be exquisitely painful in some patients, especially those with concomitant distal phalanx fractures. A digital nerve block may be useful for analgesia in patients with associated distal phalanx fractures or nail matrix (plate) injuries requiring manipulation beyond simple trephination. Otherwise, trephination is a brief procedure and often brings instant pain relief, thus obviating the need for a digital nerve block. (See "Infiltration of local anesthetics" and "Digital nerve block", section on 'Fingers'.)Rarely, anxiety may be great enough to warrant mild procedural sedation (eg, oral midazolam), especially in young children. (See "Procedural sedation in children outside of the operating room".)PROCEDURE — Subungual hematomas with an intact nail fold are treated with nail trephination [10,11]. Nail removal is performed when concern exists that a nail matrix (plate) laceration has occurred, or in the setting of an avulsion injury in which subungual sutures are necessary to repair the fingertip or toe tip.In patients with simple subungual hematomas, the majority of patients will have an acceptable outcome with trephination alone, and poor outcome cannot be predicted by features such as hematoma size or the presence of a fracture [1].Nail trephination●In selected patients, perform a digital block or sedation. (See "Digital nerve block" and "Procedural sedation in children outside of the operating room" and "Procedural sedation in adults".)●Restrain the extremity and digit.●Clean the nail with povidone iodine swabs using sterile technique. Isopropyl alcohol is highly flammable and should be avoided if electrocautery is used.●Puncture the nail with a hot metal wire (eg, an electrocautery device [5]) or a carbon dioxide laser (figure 3) [6]. Press the device against the nail in the center of the hematoma while avoiding the lunula and its associated nail matrix. Avoid contact with the nail bed. In some patients, the blood may spurt from the nail under high pressure. The hole should be large enough (3 to 4 mm) for continued drainage, which may occur for 24 to 36 hours after the injury.●Alternatively, trephine using one of the following methods:•Twirl a needle while applying gentle pressure until blood is expressed through the hole [7]. If a small bore needle (eg, 23 gauge) is used, multiple holes should be placed to reduce the chance of plugging and hematoma reaccumulation. If a large bore needle (eg, 18 gauge) is used, a single 3 to 4 mm hole should suffice [4].•Insert an insulin syringe needle (29 gauge) underneath the nail at the distal hyponychium (figure 1) and advance it proximally and parallel to the nail plate with gentle suction on the syringe until the hematoma begins to drain [8]. Apply light pressure to the nail to complete evacuation. This method works especially well for subungual hematomas of the second through fifth toe tips.•Using a mesoscission device (eg, PathFormer) bore multiple holes in the nail over the hematoma (picture 6). This device uses electrical resistance to determine depth of mechanical boring, thus avoiding inadvertent puncture of the nail bed (picture 5) [9].●Cover the puncture site with a sterile gauze dressing while the wound continues to drain.Nail removal — Nail removal and primary repair of the laceration are recommended in the event of disruption of the nail matrix (nail fold) or digital (fingertip or toe tip) avulsion [12]. If nail removal is indicated to explore for complex nail bed lacerations (eg, if nail edges are disrupted with a deep laceration), subungual hematoma drainage is not indicated. However, most simple nail bed lacerations that do not involve the nail folds, do not require nail removal and laceration repair. (See "Management of fingertip injuries", section on 'Indications, contraindications, and precautions'.)We suggest that patients with painful subungual hematomas and intact nail folds undergo trephination alone rather than nail removal and nail bed repair even when large hematomas or underlying fractures are present [13].Traditionally, nail removal was recommended when the hematoma involved more than 25 to 50 percent of the nail or in the presence of fracture because these findings have been associated with nail bed lacerations longer than 2 to 3 mm [12,14,15]. However, subsequent small observational studies have failed to show a difference in short- or long-term outcomes, including the presence of infection or nail deformity regardless of whether patients underwent nail removal or simple trephination [1,16]. Furthermore, nail removal is a painful and time-consuming procedure that typically requires digital anesthetic block and, in young children, procedural sedation.Nail removal should occur when a nail laceration threatens the preservation of the nail or digit (eg, nail fold injury with marked laceration of the nail bed, typically in association with a fingertip or toe avulsion).The evaluation and management of fingernail avulsion is discussed in greater detail separately. (See "Management of fingertip injuries", section on 'Fingertip skin avulsion'.)COMPLICATIONS — The potential complications of a subungual hematoma should be discussed with the patient and his or her parents. They include the possibility of onycholysis (ie, separation of the nail plate from the nail bed), nail deformity, nail loss, and infection. Complications are more likely to occur when care is delayed [17].In a retrospective analysis, 123 patients with 127 subungual hematomas repaired by simple trephination were surveyed 5 to 13 months after their injuries; 74 percent of the patients responded with the following results [18]:●85 percent reported an excellent or very good outcome.●2 percent reported a poor outcome (nail splitting).●No correlation was found between outcome and size of the hematoma or the presence of fracture or infection.Infection — We suggest that patients with simple subungual hematomas not receive prophylactic antibiotics after trephination. The use of prophylactic antibiotics does not appear to improve outcomes in patients with subungual hematomas and intact nail folds. As an example, in an observational study of 47 patients with subungual hematomas who underwent simple trephination, no infections occurred, regardless of hematoma size or presence of distal phalanx fracture [16]. None of these patients received prophylactic antibiotics.Distal phalanx fractures — Radiographs of the distal phalanx are warranted in most patients with subungual hematomas because those injuries will require splinting and, if a displaced fracture is found, subspecialty referral. As an example, in one study of 47 patients with subungual hematoma, 32 percent also had distal phalangeal fractures [15]. Fractures were more likely to be present in patients with hematomas involving at least 50 percent of the nail bed than in those involving less (42 versus 0 percent). (See "Distal phalanx fractures", section on 'Radiographic evaluation'.)A distal phalanx fracture associated with a subungual hematoma is an open fracture. The digit should be splinted for comfort. The use of prophylactic antibiotics in healthy patients should not be routine. (See 'Infection' above.) If the medical provider chooses to use prophylactic antibiotics, we suggest a first generation cephalosporin (eg, cephalexin) [19,20]. However, if community-acquired methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (CA-MRSA) is of concern in the provider's region or if the child or family has a recent history of CA-MRSA infection, antibiotic choice may need to be altered to cover this pathogen (eg, clindamycin). (See 'Infection' above and "Distal phalanx fractures", section on 'Prophylactic antibiotics' and "Evaluation and management of suspected methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus skin and soft tissue infections in children", section on 'Systemic agents'.)FOLLOW-UP CARE — After trephination, the clinician should instruct the patient and family to keep the affected digit clean and dry. There is no need to soak the affected digit because this treatment may lead to fibrin clot breakdown and allow the introduction of bacteria into a previously sterile space [7].Patients and families should be instructed to return for reevaluation for any of the following reasons:●Reaccumulation of the hematoma with pain●Signs of infection (warmth, redness, excessive swelling, fever)Patients who have subungual hematomas in association with a distal phalanx fracture should apply ice and elevate the digit during the first 24 to 48 hours to reduce soft tissue swelling and oral analgesia (eg, ibuprofen 10 mg/kg, maximum dose: 800 mg).Nondisplaced distal phalanx fractures should be splinted with the DIP joint in extension for three to four weeks. Immobilization past four weeks may lead to excessive joint stiffness and some degree of loss of function. (See "Distal phalanx fractures", section on 'Management'.)Displaced or intraarticular distal phalanx fractures warrant consultation with a hand or orthopedic surgeon at the initial evaluation. (See "Distal phalanx fractures", section on 'Indications for surgical referral'.)Rarely, chronic subungual hematomas may be the result of child abuse [21]. When this is suspected, prompt involvement of an experienced child protection team (eg, social worker, nurse, physician with more extensive experience in the management of child abuse), if available, is indicated. In many parts of the world (including the United States, United Kingdom, and Australia), mandatory reporting to appropriate governmental authorities is required. (See "Child abuse: Social and medicolegal issues", section on 'Reporting suspected abuse' and "Physical abuse in children: Diagnostic evaluation and management" and "Child abuse: Social and medicolegal issues".)SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS●Subungual hematomas (blood under the fingernail or toenail) may be simple (ie, the nail and nail fold are intact) or accompanied by significant injuries to the nail fold and digit (eg, fingertip avulsion) (figure 1). (See 'Anatomy' above.)●The medical provider should trephine subungual hematomas that are acute (less than 24 to 48 hours old), are not spontaneously draining, are associated with intact nail folds, and painful. After 48 hours, most subungual hematomas have clotted and trephination is typically not effective. (See 'Indications' above.)●Patients with infected wounds, extensive nail bed injury, and displaced or intraarticular fractures should be evaluated by a hand surgeon, if available. (See 'Indications for subspecialty consultation or referral' above.)●The involved digit should have a complete neurovascular exam and specific assessment of the extensor tendon for evidence of tendon disruption at the DIP joint (mallet finger). The digit should be inspected for evidence of nail fold disruption, deformity, or avulsion. We suggest obtaining radiographs in all patients with large subungual hematomas because associated fractures are common, especially with subungual hematomas that occupy >50 percent of the nail plate. (See 'Evaluation' above.)●We suggest that patients with simple subungual hematomas that are painful undergo trephination by methods that avoid significant compression of the nail against the nail bed, such as cautery using an electrocautery device or carbon laser (figure 3), aspiration with an insulin syringe needle (distal nail subungual hematomas only) (figure 1) or a mesoscission device (picture 6 and picture 5) rather than by boring through the nail with a needle (Grade 2C). The clinician should not use a heated paper clip as a cautery device. (See 'Choice of device' above and 'Procedure' above.)●We suggest that patients with painful subungual hematomas and intact nail folds undergo trephination alone rather than nail removal and nail bed repair even when large hematomas or underlying fractures are present (Grade 2C). (See 'Nail removal' above.)●We suggest that patients with simple subungual hematomas not receive prophylactic antibiotics after trephination (Grade 2C). (See 'Infection' above.)●Nondisplaced distal phalanx fractures should be splinted with the DIP joint in extension for three to four weeks. (See 'Distal phalanx fractures' above.)
		
