
			INTRODUCTION — Perforation is one of the most feared complications of endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP). This topic review will focus on the risk factors, diagnosis, and treatment of post-ERCP perforation. An overview of the complications of ERCP and detailed discussions of other individual complications are presented separately. (See "Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography: Indications, patient preparation, and complications" and "Post-endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) pancreatitis" and "Post-endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) bleeding" and "Rare complications of endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)".)CLASSIFICATION — Three types of perforation complicating ERCP have been recognized [1,2]:●Type I: Free bowel wall perforation●Type II: Retroperitoneal duodenal perforation●Type III: Perforation of the pancreatic or bile ductOf these, retroperitoneal duodenal perforations are the most common. In a French series of perforations that occurred between 1989 and 2010, 30 of 44 perforations (68 percent) were retroperitoneal duodenal perforations [3]. They usually occur as a result of a sphincterotomy that extends beyond the intramural portion of bile duct. Perforation of the pancreatic or bile duct usually occurs following dilation of strictures, forceful cannulation, guidewire insertion, stent migration, or difficult stone extraction [4-12]. Free abdominal perforation of the duodenum or jejunum is rare, usually occurring in patients with a stricture or anomalous anatomy, such as Billroth II gastrectomy [13-15]. (See "Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) after Billroth II reconstruction" and "ERCP in patients with Roux-en-Y anatomy".) Gastric and esophageal perforation [4,16,17] and pneumomediastinum without evidence of perforation [18] have also been described after ERCP and sphincterotomy. Intestinal perforation related to biliary stents is another uncommon complication. (See "Rare complications of endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)".)INCIDENCE — Retroduodenal perforation was reported in 0.5 to 2.1 percent of sphincterotomies in a number of older large series [19]. More recently, the incidence of perforation has appeared to decrease to less than 0.5 percent, probably because of improvement in experience and skill of endoscopists [20]. However, severe and fatal cases continue to occur [21,22]. In a summary of 21 prospective studies involving 16,855 patients undergoing diagnostic and therapeutic ERCP between 1987 and 2003, post-ERCP perforations totaled 101 (0.60 percent), with 10 deaths (0.06 percent) [23].The following examples illustrate the findings in several large studies.●A total of 30 perforations (0.4 percent) were reported in two prospective multicenter studies involving 7252 patients undergoing mainly therapeutic ERCP [24,25].●Perforations were observed in 0.6 percent of 12,427 ERCPs in a report from the Mayo clinic [12]. The most common causes were due to guidewire insertion (32 percent), sphincterotomy (15 percent), passage of the endoscope (11 percent), and stent migration (9 percent).●A documented perforation (esophageal, gastric, duodenal, or bile duct) occurred in 33 of 9314 patients (0.3 percent) who underwent ERCP at Duke University from 1987 to 1998 [4].●Retroduodenal or bowel wall perforation occurred in 8 of 2347 patients (0.3 percent) undergoing biliary endoscopic sphincterotomy in a prospective series from North America [26]. It was severe in five (0.2 percent), and fatal in one patient (0.04 percent).●Forty patients with perforation were identified in a series of 6040 ERCPs (0.6 percent), including 2874 endoscopic sphincterotomies, performed between 1994 and 1998 [1].●Free peritoneal perforation occurred in 1 of 942 (0.1 percent) patients undergoing diagnostic ERCP, and in 3 of 1827 (0.2 percent) patients undergoing therapeutic ERCP in a large Italian series [27]. Retroperitoneal perforation occurred in 12 of 1827 patients (0.7 percent) who underwent therapeutic ERCP, with only one death (0.05 percent).●Over a two-year period, an esophageal perforation, a free duodenal perforation, and 15 retroperitoneal perforations occurred in 3124 patients (0.5 percent) undergoing diagnostic and therapeutic ERCP [28].●In a retrospective study, among 12,817 patients undergoing ERCP at the Medical University of South Carolina between 1995 and 2008, a total of 24 perforations (0.2 percent) were reported. Twelve were retroperitoneal perforations occurring during sphincterotomy, and the other 12 were wall perforations at sites remote from the papilla [29].●In a French retrospective study, among 9880 patients undergoing ERCP between 1989 and 2010, a total of 44 perforations (0.4 percent) were reported [3].●In a retrospective study from China, 16 perforations were identified from 2003 and 2011 among 8504 patients undergoing ERCP (0.45 percent) [30].RISK FACTORS — A number of patient- and procedure-related risk factors for perforation have been identified in individual reports and in large series. A difficulty with interpreting the risk factors identified in these reports is that many of the studies combined free bowel wall perforation at a site remote from the papilla (endoscope-related) and periampullary retroperitoneal perforation (sphincterotomy-related). The mechanisms leading to the different types of perforations are substantially different. Furthermore, the absolute number of patients studied is small, reflecting the infrequent occurrence of these complications.Risk factors for overall perforations — The following risk factors for both free abdominal or retroperitoneal perforation were identified by multivariate logistic regression analysis in a large retrospective case-control study from Duke that included 33 ERCP-related perforations out of 9314 ERCP procedures [4]:●Patient-related risk factors – Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction and a dilated common bile duct. Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction has also been recognized as a risk factor in other reports [31,32]; however, it is usually in conjunction with a small, rather than a dilated, common bile duct [31,32]. A possible explanation for this difference was that the dilated common bile duct in the Duke series was due to a distal common bile duct stricture, and the increased risk of perforation in this group was related to the manipulations carried out to obtain deep cannulation.●Procedure-related risk factors – Performance of a sphincterotomy, longer duration of the procedure, and biliary stricture dilation.Risk factors for bowel wall perforation — The risk of bowel wall perforation is increased in patients who have stenosis in the upper gastrointestinal tract or bile ducts, and in patients with abnormal gastrointestinal anatomy, such as gastrectomy, pancreaticoduodenectomy, and situs inversus [13,14,29,33]. Particular caution is required with the use of a side-viewing duodenoscope (the endoscope typically used for ERCP) in patients with a Billroth II gastrectomy [33,34]. (See "Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) after Billroth II reconstruction".)Risk factors for retroperitoneal perforation — The risk of retroperitoneal perforation is increased with precut sphincterotomy and larger sphincterotomies, particularly those that are created outside of the usually recommended landmarks (11 to 1 o'clock) [27,35-37]. In one report, 7 of 13 sphincterotomy perforations were related to precutting [4]. (See "Precut (access) papillotomy".) Retroperitoneal perforation can also occur after ampullectomy. In a retrospective Italian study between 1999 and 2011, an ampullectomy had been performed in 7 out of 30 cases (23 percent) of duodeno-pancreato-biliary perforations reported after ERCP [38]. (See "Treatment of ampullary adenomas".)Other risk factors identified in individual reports include a small caliber bile duct [39], the presence of a peripapillary diverticulum [36,40], and intramural injection of contrast [27].CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS — Free abdominal perforation is almost always recognized immediately based upon clinical symptoms, physical signs, and fluoroscopic findings. By contrast, retroduodenal perforation is usually determined by the radiologic evidence of air or contrast in the retroperitoneal space outside the confines of the bile duct and duodenum during computed tomographic (CT) evaluation for post-ERCP pain. Perforation is rarely evident endoscopically (picture 1).Patients with undetected leaks can present hours after the procedure with pain, fever, and leukocytosis. Pneumomediastinum and subcutaneous emphysema can occur [18,41-45]. Pneumothorax [46] and gas in the portal system [47] have also been rarely described. Case reports have documented patients who developed pneumoretroperitoneum, pneumoperitoneum, pneumomediastinum, pneumothorax, and subcutaneous emphysema following ERCP [48-50].An abdominal CT scan should be obtained in patients who are suspected of having a perforation, even if they do not have evidence of retroperitoneal air on plain films, since CT scan is the most sensitive means for detecting perforation [51,52]. The clinical or radiographic amount of air does not always indicate the size of the perforation or correlate with the severity of the complication, but rather reflects the degree of manipulation after the perforation occurred [51,53].Retroperitoneal air in asymptomatic patients — As discussed above, perforation is typically associated with the presence of retroperitoneal air, which can be detected by plain radiographs or CT. However, retroperitoneal air may also develop following sphincterotomy in patients who are clinically asymptomatic [52,54]. Such patients may not require intervention. This was illustrated in a series of 21 patients studied prospectively who underwent an abdominal CT scan following sphincterotomy. Retroperitoneal air was observed in six (29 percent) patients, all of whom were asymptomatic and had an uneventful postprocedural course [54]. No clinical or procedure-related characteristics predicted the presence of air.The origin of retroperitoneal air in such patients is presumably related to dissection through an injured or macroscopically intact bowel, which has also been described after colonoscopy [55,56], although sealed microperforations are also possible. These findings suggest that the presence of retroperitoneal air in the absence of symptoms should warrant careful observation but may not require intervention.Retroperitoneal perforation associated with pancreatitis — The finding of retroperitoneal air may be challenging in patients who are symptomatic following sphincterotomy in whom a distinction needs to be made between perforation, clinically insignificant retroperitoneal air, and pancreatitis, particularly since pancreatitis and perforation can have a similar clinical presentation or occur simultaneously [47,51,57]. This was illustrated in a study that included 36 patients who developed prolonged abdominal pain following sphincterotomy and underwent a diagnostic CT scan. Complications included acute pancreatitis in 23 patients (64 percent), duodenal perforation in 11 (31 percent), and both pancreatitis and duodenal perforation in six patients (17 percent) [51]. The diagnosis of retroperitoneal duodenal perforation associated with pancreatitis should be based upon the detection of retroperitoneal air or contrast in a symptomatic patient meeting criteria for post-ERCP pancreatitis. (See "Post-endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) pancreatitis".) A retroperitoneal abscess should be suspected in patients with post-ERCP pancreatitis who develop back pain and persistent fever [58].GRADING — Post-ERCP retroperitoneal perforation can be graded as mild, moderate or severe, based upon a consensus definition [19]:●Mild – Possible, or only very slight leak of fluid or contrast, treatable by fluids and suction for three days or less●Moderate – Any definite perforation treated medically for 4 to 10 days●Severe – Medical treatment for more than 10 days or intervention (percutaneous or surgical)MANAGEMENT — Patients with esophageal and free abdominal gastric, jejunal, or duodenal perforation usually require surgery [4,16,17,59]. By contrast, a conservative approach to retroperitoneal perforation following endoscopic sphincterotomy has been adopted over the years [2,4,11,12,29,60-62]. However, early surgical consultation and careful observation is mandatory since the outcome may be poor in patients who do not receive prompt and appropriate treatment [1,63,64].●Surgery: Overall, surgery was required in 20 to 50 percent of patients with a perforation in several reports [3,4,12,19,26,27,38,59,65-71]. Surgery was most often needed in patients with free bowel wall perforations.●Endoscopic therapy:•Trough-the-scope clips – The effective and safe placement of metallic endoclips in the treatment of duodenal perforation secondary to sphincterotomy has been reported [72-74]. Effective endoscopic closure of duodenal perforations caused by the tip of the endoscope during ERCP using endoclips has also been reported [70,75,76].•Over-the-scope clip – In a case report, a jejunal perforation in a patient with Billroth II anatomy during ERCP was effectively sealed with an over-the-scope clip device [77].•Fibrin glue – In a case report, the injection of fibrin glue proved effective in sealing a perforation located in the posterior wall of the duodenal bulb [78].•Covered stents – Effective temporary placement of fully covered self-expandable metal stents for the treatment of perforation following endoscopic sphincterotomy has been reported [79-82].•Whether or not the therapeutic goal of ERCP was achieved, a nasobiliary tube can be placed in an attempt to aspirate bile and minimize retroperitoneal contamination if a retroperitoneal perforation is recognized during the procedure, but not at the price of marked prolongation of the procedure.●Percutaneous transhepatic drainage: In difficult cases, percutaneous transhepatic drainage may be a safer alternative. A nasobiliary or transhepatic drain is preferred since an internal biliary stent does not permit external drainage of bile. (See "Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography".)In addition to the above, patients should be kept fasting while receiving hydration, nasogastric or nasoduodenal suction, and intravenous antibiotics. Percutaneous drainage may be an alternative to surgical drainage in patients who develop retroperitoneal collections. Patients who are expected to remain on bowel rest for at least one week should be placed on total parenteral nutrition. Surgery should be recommended for patients with a major contrast leak, persistent biliary obstruction, cholangitis, and those whose symptoms do not improve after a brief period of nonoperative management [64]. The type of surgical intervention depends upon the clinicopathological condition. Options include choledochotomy with stone extraction and T-tube drainage, repair of the perforation, drainage of an abscess or phlegmon, choledochojejunostomy, or pancreatoduodenectomy [64,83,84].PROGNOSIS — The prognosis of patients with a perforation depends upon the rapidity with which it is recognized, the clinical setting, and patient comorbidities. The overall mortality was 16 percent in an older report that summarized the outcomes of 153 perforations following endoscopic sphincterotomy [19]. Overall mortality was 6 percent (7 out of 115 patients) in five large series between 1987 and 2004 [4,26,27,85,86], and a mortality rate of 8 percent (20 out of 251 patients) was demonstrated in a review that considered major studies from the year 2000 onwards [87]. An overall mortality of 13 percent (4 deaths out of 30 cases) and a post-operative mortality of 27 percent (4 deaths out of 15 cases) were reported in a retrospective study from Italy between 1999 and 2011 [38]. The lower mortality seen in many of the more recent studies may reflect the benefits related to a conservative team approach for the management of small retroperitoneal perforations.PREVENTION — The risk of perforation can be minimized when ERCP is performed by well-trained endoscopists and assistants abiding by the following technique-related principles [31]:●Proper orientation of the sphincterotome between 11 and 1 o'clock●Step-by-step incision●Avoiding a "zipper" cut●Sphincterotomy length tailored to the size of papilla, bile duct, and eventual stone (see "Endoscopic management of bile duct stones: Standard techniques and mechanical lithotripsy")●Judicious use of precut papillotomy (see "Precut (access) papillotomy")●Appropriate technique in cases of anatomical variants such as peripapillary diverticula and Billroth II gastrectomy (see "Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) after Billroth II reconstruction" and "ERCP in patients with Roux-en-Y anatomy")●Use of balloon dilatation in conjunction with sphincterotomy in patients with large bile duct stones, rather than relying on sphincterotomy alone [88-90], though severe perforations have been noted with this technique as well [89] (see "Endoscopic balloon dilatation for removal of bile duct stones") INFORMATION FOR PATIENTS — UpToDate offers two types of patient education materials, "The Basics" and "Beyond the Basics." The Basics patient education pieces are written in plain language, at the 5th to 6th grade reading level, and they answer the four or five key questions a patient might have about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who want a general overview and who prefer short, easy-to-read materials. Beyond the Basics patient education pieces are longer, more sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are written at the 10th to 12th grade reading level and are best for patients who want in-depth information and are comfortable with some medical jargon.Here are the patient education articles that are relevant to this topic. We encourage you to print or e-mail these topics to your patients. (You can also locate patient education articles on a variety of subjects by searching on "patient info" and the keyword(s) of interest.) ●Beyond the Basics topics (see "Patient information: ERCP (endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography) (Beyond the Basics)")SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS●Three types of perforation complicating endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) have been recognized (see 'Classification' above):•Retroperitoneal duodenal perforation•Free bowel-wall perforation•Perforation of the bile ducts●Retroduodenal perforation was reported in 0.5 to 2.1 percent of sphincterotomies in a number of older large series. More recently, the incidence of perforation has appeared to decrease to less than 0.5 percent, probably because of improvement in experience and skill of the endoscopists. (See 'Incidence' above.)●Free abdominal perforation is almost always recognized immediately based upon clinical symptoms, physical signs, and fluoroscopic findings. By contrast, retroduodenal perforation is usually determined by the radiologic evidence of air or contrast in the retroperitoneal space outside the confines of the bile duct and duodenum during computed tomographic (CT) evaluation for post-ERCP pain. Perforation is rarely evident endoscopically. (See 'Clinical manifestations and diagnosis' above.)●Retroperitoneal air may also develop following sphincterotomy in patients who are clinically asymptomatic [52,54]. Such patients may not require intervention. (See 'Retroperitoneal air in asymptomatic patients' above.)●An abdominal CT scan should be obtained in patients who are suspected of having a perforation, even if they do not have evidence of retroperitoneal air on plain films, since CT scan is the most sensitive means for detecting perforation. (See 'Clinical manifestations and diagnosis' above.)●Patients with esophageal and free abdominal gastric, jejunal, or duodenal perforation usually require surgery. By contrast, a conservative approach to small retroperitoneal perforation may be appropriate. However, early surgical consultation and careful observation is mandatory since the outcome may be poor in patients who do not receive prompt and appropriate treatment. (See 'Management' above.)
		
