





mouth
      


[n. mouth; v. mouth] 
/n. maʊθ; v. maʊð/ 
 


Spell
Syllables






Synonyms 



Examples 



Word Origin 








noun, plural mouths        [mouth z]  /maʊðz/  (Show IPA) 

1. 

Anatomy, Zoology. 
the opening through which an animal or human takes in food. 
the cavity containing the structures used in mastication. 
the structures enclosing or being within this cavity, considered as a whole. 




2. 
the masticating and tasting apparatus. 


3. 
a person or animal dependent on someone for sustenance: another mouth to feed.


4. 
the oral opening or cavity considered as the source of vocal utterance. 

5. 
utterance or expression: to give mouth to one's thoughts.


6. 
talk, especially loud, empty, or boastful talk: That man is all mouth.


7. 
disrespectful talk or language; back talk; impudence. 

8. 
a grimace made with the lips. 

9. 
an opening leading out of or into any cavity or hollow place or thing: the mouth of a cave; a bottle's mouth.


10. 
the outfall at the lower end of a river or stream, where flowing water is discharged, as into a lake, sea, or ocean: the mouth of the Nile.


11. 
the opening between the jaws of a vise or the like. 

12. 
the lateral hole of an organ pipe. 

13. 
the lateral blowhole of a flute. 











Expand 


verb (used with object)  

14. 
to utter in a sonorous or pompous manner, or with excessive mouth movements: to mouth a speech.



15. 
to form (a word, sound, etc.) with the lips without actually making an utterance: She silently mouthed her answer so as not to wake her napping child.



16. 
to utter or pronounce softly and indistinctly; mumble: Stop mouthing your words and speak up.


17. 
to put or take into the mouth, as food. 

18. 
to press, rub, or chew at with the mouth or lips: The dog mouthed the toys.


19. 
to accustom (a horse) to the use of the bit and bridle. 




Expand 


verb (used without object)  

20. 
to speak sonorously and oratorically, or with excessive mouth movement. 


21. 
to grimace with the lips. 




Verb phrases  

22. 

mouth off, Slang.  
to talk back; sass: He mouthed off to his mother.

to express one's opinions, objections, or the like in a forceful or uninhibited manner, especially in public. 






Idioms  

23. 

down in /at the mouth, Informal. dejected; depressed; disheartened: Ever since he lost his job, he has been looking very down in the mouth.



24. 

run off at the mouth, Informal. to talk incessantly or indiscreetly. 


25. 

talk out of both sides of one's mouth, to make contradictory or untruthful statements. 

Expand 



Origin Expand 








Middle English





Old English






900


before 900;  Middle English;  Old English  mūth; cognate with German  Mund,  Old Norse  munnr  



Related forms Expand 



mouther, noun  

mouthless, adjective  

outmouth, verb (used with object)  




Synonyms Expand 



5. voice, speech. 







Dictionary.com UnabridgedBased on the Random House Dictionary, © Random House, Inc. 2015.
Cite This Source




Examples from the web for mouth
Expand



He immediately returned the gesture, opening his mouth and subtly but distinctly moving his tongue. 
She paused, opening her mouth to sneeze, and stuck out her arms as if to gather strength to fight it back. 
Symptoms vary and depend on the specific cause of the mouth ulcer. 
And only to slip my tongue into the slot of your mouth. The government is running the economy from hand to mouth. The digestive process begins before food even enters the mouth. As it turned out, when the subjects watched a mouth move, the part of their brain responsible for controlling their mouth lit up. From behind her, a beefy brute with a scar on his cheek clamps a meaty hand over her mouth. The scent of garlic sizzling in a skillet always makes your mouth water. Clinical trials reveal that a drug designed to fight dry mouth also reduces the spread of lung-cancer tumors. 







Expand



British Dictionary definitions for mouth Expand




mouth




noun (maʊθ) (pl) mouths (maʊðz)

1.

the opening through which many animals take in food and issue vocal sounds 


2.

the system of organs surrounding this opening, including the lips, tongue, teeth, etc 


3.

the visible part of the lips on the face related adjectives oral oscular 


4.

a person regarded as a consumer of food: four mouths to feed 


5.

verbal expression (esp in the phrase give mouth to) 


6.

a particular manner of speaking: a foul mouth 


7.

(informal) boastful, rude, or excessive talk: he is all mouth 


8.

the point where a river issues into a sea or lake 


9.

the opening of a container, such as a jar 


10.

the opening of or place leading into a cave, tunnel, volcano, etc 


11.

that part of the inner lip of a horse on which the bit acts, esp when specified as to sensitivity: a hard mouth 


12.

(music) the narrow slit in an organ pipe 


13.

the opening between the jaws of a vice or other gripping device 


14.

a pout; grimace 


15.

by word of mouth, orally rather than by written means 


16.

down in the mouth, down at the mouth, in low spirits 


17.

(informal) have a big mouth, open one's big mouth, to speak indiscreetly, loudly, or excessively 


18.

keep one's mouth shut, to keep a secret 


19.

put one's money where one's mouth is, to take appropriate action to support what one has said 


20.

put words into someone's mouth 
to represent, often inaccurately, what someone has said
to tell someone what to say




21.

(informal) run off at the mouth, to talk incessantly, esp about unimportant matters 



verb (maʊð)

22.

to speak or say (something) insincerely, esp in public 


23.

(transitive) to form (words) with movements of the lips but without speaking 


24.

(transitive) to accustom (a horse) to wearing a bit 


25.

(transitive) to take (something) into the mouth or to move (something) around inside the mouth 


26.

(intransitive) usually foll by at. to make a grimace 






Derived Forms 


mouther (ˈmaʊðə) noun 




Word Origin 


Old English mūth; compare Old Norse muthr, Gothic munths, Dutch mond 



 Expand

Collins English Dictionary - Complete & Unabridged 2012 Digital Edition © William Collins Sons & Co. Ltd. 1979, 1986 © HarperCollinsPublishers 1998, 2000, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2012
Cite This Source




Word Origin and History for mouth Expand




n. 

Old English muþ "mouth, opening, door, gate," from Proto-Germanic *munthaz (cf. Old Saxon, Old Frisian muth, Old Norse munnr, Danish mund, Middle Dutch mont, Dutch mond, Old High German mund, German Mund, Gothic munþs "mouth"), with characteristic loss of nasal consonant in Old English (cf. tooth, goose, etc.), from PIE *mnto-s (cf. Latin mentum "chin"). In the sense of "outfall of a river" it is attested from late Old English; as the opening of anything with capacity (a bottle, cave, etc.) it is recorded from c.1200. Mouth-organ attested from 1660s.


v. 

c.1300, "to speak," from mouth (n.). Related: Mouthed; mouthing. Old English had muðettan "to blab."



 

Online Etymology Dictionary, © 2010 Douglas Harper
Cite This Source




mouth in Medicine Expand


mouth (mouth)n. pl. mouths (mouðz) 
 The body opening through which an animal takes in food.  The oral cavity.  The opening to any cavity or canal in an organ or a bodily part.
 

The American Heritage® Stedman's Medical DictionaryCopyright © 2002, 2001, 1995 by Houghton Mifflin Company. Published by Houghton Mifflin Company.
Cite This Source




Slang definitions & phrases for mouth Expand


mouth
noun

Impudence; backtalk; sass: I've had about enough of your mouth (1926+) 
verb

: They jounced and mouthed each other 
Related Terms

bad-mouth, bigmouth, blow off one's mouth, cotton mouth, foot-in-mouth disease, foulmouth, foulmouthed, from the horse's mouth,loudmouth,motor-mouth,mushmouth, poor-mouth, ratchet-mouth, run off at the mouth, shoot off one's mouth, smartmouth, watch one's mouth, zip one's lip 



The Dictionary of American Slang, Fourth Edition by Barbara Ann Kipfer, PhD. and Robert L. Chapman, Ph.D.Copyright (C) 2007 by HarperCollins Publishers.
Cite This Source




Idioms and Phrases with mouth Expand




mouth






In addition to the idiom beginning with 


mouth


 also see:

bad mouth
big mouth
butter wouldn't melt in one's mouth
down in the dumps (mouth)
foam at the mouth
foot in one's mouth
from the horse's mouth
hand to mouth
have one's heart in one's mouth
keep one's mouth shut
laugh out of the other side of one's mouth
leave a bad taste in one's mouth
look a gift horse in the mouth
make one's mouth water
melt in one's mouth
not open one's mouth
out of the mouths of babes
put one's money where one's mouth is
put words in someone's mouth
run off at the mouth
shoot off one's mouth
take the bit in one's mouth
take the bread out of someone's mouth
take the words out of someone's mouth
word of mouth








 Expand

The American Heritage® Idioms DictionaryCopyright © 2002, 2001, 1995 by Houghton Mifflin Company. Published by Houghton Mifflin Company.
Cite This Source



