
			INTRODUCTION — Acute renal failure (ARF) is an abrupt and usually reversible decline in the glomerular filtration rate (GFR). This results in an elevation of serum blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, and other metabolic waste products that are normally excreted by the kidney.The term acute kidney injury (AKI), rather than ARF, is increasingly used by the nephrology community to refer to the acute loss of kidney function. This term also highlights that injury to the kidney that does not result in "failure" is also of great clinical significance. In this topic review, the acute loss of kidney function will be referred to as AKI.The initial assessment of patients with AKI and management of the major complications of AKI are discussed here. The incidence, causes, diagnosis, and prevention of AKI are presented separately. (See "Diagnostic approach to the patient with acute kidney injury (acute renal failure) or chronic kidney disease" and "Renal and patient outcomes after acute tubular necrosis" and "Possible prevention and therapy of postischemic (ischemic) acute tubular necrosis".)PATHOGENESIS — Acute kidney injury (AKI) has multiple possible etiologies. Among hospitalized patients, AKI is most commonly due to acute tubular necrosis (ATN) from ischemia, nephrotoxin exposure, or sepsis [1]. The pathogenesis of ATN is discussed elsewhere. (See "Pathogenesis and etiology of postischemic (ischemic) acute tubular necrosis" and "Pathogenesis, clinical features, and diagnosis of contrast-induced nephropathy".)Other frequent causes of AKI among either ambulatory or hospitalized patients include volume depletion, urinary obstruction, rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis, and acute interstitial nephritis. The pathogeneses of these disorders are also discussed elsewhere. (See "Etiology and diagnosis of prerenal disease and acute tubular necrosis in acute kidney injury (acute renal failure)" and "Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of urinary tract obstruction and hydronephrosis" and "Overview of the classification and treatment of rapidly progressive (crescentic) glomerulonephritis" and "Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of acute interstitial nephritis".)DIAGNOSIS — Acute kidney injury (AKI) is generally detected by an increase in the serum creatinine and/or a decrease in urine output. The magnitude of the increase in creatinine and/or decrease in urine output that is required to establish a diagnosis of AKI has been the focus of multiple expert consensus groups. The purpose of establishing a precise definition of AKI is to allow better interpretation of epidemiologic and clinical studies and to identify potential therapies. The potential limitations of the different consensus criteria that have been proposed are discussed elsewhere. (See "Definition of acute kidney injury (acute renal failure)".)INITIAL EVALUATION AFTER DIAGNOSIS — Among many patients, acute kidney injury (AKI) is mild and is manifested only by a transient increase in the serum creatinine or fall in urine output. However, AKI can cause life-threatening complications, even among those with relatively less severe disease. In addition, the serum creatinine will not accurately reflect the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) in patients who are not in steady state. Thus, among patients who have just developed AKI and in whom the serum creatinine is actively increasing, the estimated GFR (eGFR), based upon the serum creatinine, will overestimate the actual GFR. Conversely, among patients who are recovering from AKI, the eGFR may underestimate the actual GFR.All patients who present with AKI must be carefully evaluated both for reversible causes, such as hypotension, volume depletion, or obstruction, and for the presence of complications such as hyperkalemia and volume overload (see 'Management' below). The initial evaluation of the patient with AKI is directed at determining the cause and identifying the complications that may require immediate attention.The diagnostic evaluation to determine the cause of AKI is discussed elsewhere. (See "Diagnostic approach to the patient with acute kidney injury (acute renal failure) or chronic kidney disease" and "Etiology and diagnosis of prerenal disease and acute tubular necrosis in acute kidney injury (acute renal failure)", section on 'Evaluation and diagnosis'.)The major complications of AKI include volume overload, hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis, hypocalcemia, and hyperphosphatemia. With severe forms, mental status changes may be present. Hyperuricemia and hypermagnesemia may also occur. The initial assessment therefore should include the careful evaluation of volume status and measurement of serum electrolytes, particularly potassium and bicarbonate, and serum phosphate, calcium, and albumin. We also check serum uric acid, magnesium, and a complete blood count.MANAGEMENTImmediate therapy — The management of life-threatening fluid and electrolyte abnormalities due to acute kidney injury (AKI) should be started immediately. Common complications of AKI include the following:●Fluid overload●Hyperkalemia (serum potassium >5.5 mEq/L) or a rapidly increasing serum potassium●Signs of uremia, such as pericarditis, or an otherwise unexplained decline in mental status●Severe metabolic acidosis (pH <7.1)Patients with any of these complications despite appropriate medical therapy generally require urgent dialysis. However, since hemodialysis often cannot be immediately provided, such patients usually require medical treatment during the period prior to the initiation of hemodialysis. Appropriate measures are discussed in sections below or in other topic reviews, to which links are provided.Volume issues — An assessment of volume status is performed in all patients who present with AKI since correction of volume depletion or volume overload (especially when associated with worsening cardiac output) may reverse or ameliorate AKI. (See "Cardiorenal syndrome: Definition, prevalence, diagnosis, and pathophysiology" and "Cardiorenal syndrome: Prognosis and treatment".)Volume depletion — Unless contraindicated, the patient with a clinical history consistent with fluid loss (such as vomiting and diarrhea), a physical examination consistent with hypovolemia (hypotension and tachycardia), and/or oliguria should be administered intravenous fluid therapy. This fluid challenge attempts to identify prerenal failure that can progress to AKI if not treated promptly. Studies have shown that prompt reversal of volume depletion may prevent or limit kidney injury due to acute tubular necrosis (ATN) (see "Crush-related acute kidney injury (acute renal failure)" and "Prevention and treatment of heme pigment-induced acute kidney injury (acute renal failure)"). However, such fluid infusion is contraindicated in those with obvious volume overload or heart failure.Fluids may be either crystalloid or colloid. Crystalloid solutions, such as isotonic saline, are preferred for initial therapy since studies have shown that colloid solutions provide no additional benefit and are more expensive (see "Treatment of severe hypovolemia or hypovolemic shock in adults", section on 'Colloid versus crystalloid'). Potassium-containing crystalloid solutions, such as lactated Ringer's solution, should be avoided since the kidney may not be able to excrete potassium and hyperkalemia may result. There continues to be much debate as to which intravenous fluid should be administered since large volumes of normal saline may result in hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis and a more pH-balanced solution may be of greater benefit. (See "Treatment of severe hypovolemia or hypovolemic shock in adults", section on 'Chloride-restrictive fluids'.)Fluids should be targeted to physiologic endpoints such as mean arterial pressure or urine output, or, among patients in whom invasive monitoring is utilized, to dynamic changes in cardiac output. The optimal infusion rate varies depending on the clinical status and comorbidities of the patient. Overly aggressive volume repletion should be avoided as excessive volume expansion may lead to pulmonary congestion, especially in septic patients [2]. We suggest judicious administration, beginning with one to three liters of fluid, with careful and repeated clinical assessment to assess the patient's response to this therapy. In some cases, additional fluid therapy may be necessary (eg, severe burns, acute pancreatitis).The total amount of administered volume depends upon the degree of volume depletion on presentation and on ongoing losses. The restoration of adequate urine flow and improvement in renal function with fluid resuscitation is consistent with a diagnosis of prerenal disease. Patients who do not respond to administered volume with an increase in urine output or decrease in the serum creatinine are unlikely to have prerenal disease and more likely to have established ATN or other forms of intrinsic AKI such as acute or rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis or acute interstitial nephritis. However, volume status may be difficult to assess among some patients, and prerenal disease may not be reliably excluded after the initial administration of fluid: among selected patients in whom urine output is not restored with administered volume, invasive monitoring may be required to adequately assess the patient's fluid status and help guide further therapy. (See "Maintenance and replacement fluid therapy in adults" and "Treatment of severe hypovolemia or hypovolemic shock in adults".)Some patients with relatively mild volume depletion may not have an obvious history of volume loss. In addition, less severe volume depletion is difficult to accurately detect on clinical examination, especially in older patients. In this setting, AKI may still be reversed, at least in part, by fluid administration. Thus, in the absence of overt volume depletion, we frequently administer intravenous saline at a variable rate based upon clinical status. Although no consensus exists to guide therapy, among hemodynamically stable patients who do not have overt evidence of volume depletion, we administer 75 to 100 mL per hour. If this approach is undertaken, the patient's clinical status must be closely monitored to ensure that volume overload does not occur and that the rate of administration is sufficient to keep up with ongoing fluid losses. Once again, fluid therapy should be targeted to physiologic endpoints.Volume overload — Hypervolemia may be present upon initial evaluation or occur due to excessive fluid administration in the setting of impaired ability to excrete sodium and water. This is especially true for patients with sepsis who commonly receive aggressive intravenous fluid resuscitation. (See "Evaluation and management of severe sepsis and septic shock in adults", section on 'Intravenous fluids'.)Daily fluid balance is commonly positive in critically ill patients with ATN as a result of obligate fluid intake due to the administration of antibiotics, other intravenous medications, and nutritional support. This may result in progressive volume expansion and pulmonary edema, which may be especially poorly tolerated in patients with acute lung injury.Less commonly, volume overload may result from primary left ventricular dysfunction and cause AKI or type 1 cardiorenal syndrome. The diagnosis and treatment of cardiorenal syndrome are discussed elsewhere. (See "Cardiorenal syndrome: Definition, prevalence, diagnosis, and pathophysiology" and "Cardiorenal syndrome: Prognosis and treatment".)Diuretics may be used to relieve hypervolemia among patients with AKI. In a post hoc analysis of data from a multicenter randomized trial that compared liberal versus conservative fluid management among patients with acute lung injury, a positive fluid balance was associated with mortality among 306 patients who developed AKI [3]. A higher furosemide dose was associated with decreased mortality, but this effect was not significant after adjusting for fluid balance. The full results of this trial are discussed elsewhere. (See "Acute respiratory distress syndrome: Supportive care and oxygenation in adults", section on 'Fluid management'.)However, we generally do not use diuretics for prolonged therapy to postpone the initiation of dialysis since dialysis offers the most efficient method of volume removal in patients with AKI from any cause and allows clinicians to optimize nutritional support and the use of intravenous medications. However, although several observational studies have demonstrated an association between the severity of volume overload at the time of initiation of dialysis [4-6], there are no studies that have demonstrated a benefit of early initiation of dialysis for volume management (see "Renal replacement therapy (dialysis) in acute kidney injury (acute renal failure) in adults: Indications, timing, and dialysis dose"). If diuretics are used to treat volume overload, then the patient should be regularly assessed to see if urine output responds. If there is no increase in urine output, then alternative therapies such as dialysis should be initiated.If diuretics are used as temporizing agents to relieve volume overload, loop diuretics are the preferred agents as they provide a greater natriuretic effect than thiazide diuretics. In patients who are refractory to high doses of loop diuretics, concomitant administration of a thiazide diuretic may achieve effective diuresis. (See "Treatment of refractory edema in adults", section on 'Thiazide plus loop diuretics'.)Among hospitalized patients, diuretics are generally given intravenously rather than orally since the absorption of oral agents is variable in patients with decreased intestinal perfusion and motility and in those with mucosal edema. The optimal diuretic dose and regimen is discussed elsewhere. (See "Treatment of refractory edema in adults", section on 'Basic principles of diuretic dosing'.)Hyperkalemia — Hyperkalemia is a common and potentially life-threatening complication of AKI. It is especially prevalent in oliguric patients who are catabolic or have evidence of active cellular breakdown, such as rhabdomyolysis and tumor lysis syndrome.There are very few symptoms or signs of hyperkalemia, and these tend to occur only with very high serum potassium levels and are related to impaired neuromuscular transmission and cardiac conduction abnormalities. (See "Clinical manifestations of hyperkalemia in adults".)In general, all patients with AKI and hyperkalemia that is refractory to medical therapy should be dialyzed unless hyperkalemia is mild (ie, <5.5 mEq/L) and the cause of AKI is known to be easily reversed (such as prerenal AKI due to volume depletion or angiotensin-converting enzyme [ACE] inhibitors).Among patients who require dialysis, medical therapy of hyperkalemia is often required while dialysis is being arranged. Immediate therapy is warranted if electrocardiographic changes or peripheral neuromuscular abnormalities are present, regardless of the degree of hyperkalemia. (See "Treatment and prevention of hyperkalemia in adults".)Specific treatment of hyperkalemia is directed at antagonizing the membrane effects of potassium, driving extracellular potassium into the cells, or removing excess potassium from the body.The indications for specific medical therapies are discussed at length elsewhere. (See "Treatment and prevention of hyperkalemia in adults".)We do not dialyze, at least initially, patients with mild hyperkalemia and AKI that is from a known reversible cause (such as volume depletion or an ACE inhibitor/angiotensin receptor blocker [ARB]). We treat such patients with a low-potassium diet and volume administration and/or discontinuation of the ACE inhibitor or ARB. Such patients should be followed closely to make certain that such conservative therapy is effective.We also do not dialyze, at least initially, patients who have AKI from a cause that is not readily reversible, such as ATN, and who have hyperkalemia that is adequately treated with medical therapy. However, depending upon other variables (such as the time of day and available medical staff), preparations for dialysis, such as placement of a dialysis catheter, may be considered for such patients since hyperkalemia is likely to recur unless renal function recovers. This is especially true among patients who are oliguric or anuric, but the approach must be individualized for each patient.In all patients with AKI, potassium in infusions and medications should be avoided as much as possible. Dietary potassium intake should be restricted to approximately 2 grams daily. Patients who have severe hyperkalemia (defined as K >6.5 mEq/L) or rapidly rising serum potassium should not receive any dietary potassium until hyperkalemia can be addressed (either by dialysis or medical therapy).Metabolic acidosis — The excretion of acid and regeneration of bicarbonate is impaired in the setting of a low glomerular filtration rate (GFR) resulting in metabolic acidosis. Much of the acid that is normally excreted by the kidney is the product of daily metabolism. However, other factors usually contribute to severe acidosis among patients with AKI, who are often critically ill. For example, patients with AKI due to sepsis, trauma, and multi-organ failure often have increased production of lactic acid or ketoacids. Other patients who present with AKI may have metabolic acidosis resulting from loss of bicarbonate or from diarrhea or, less commonly, renal tubular acidosis.Commonly used treatments for metabolic acidosis include dialysis and bicarbonate administration. Among patients with AKI, the choice of therapy depends upon the absence or presence of volume overload and the underlying cause and severity of the acidosis.We dialyze patients with severe oligo-anuric AKI who are volume overloaded and have severe metabolic acidosis (a pH <7.1), regardless of the cause of acidosis. Physiologic studies have suggested that this degree of acidemia may produce hemodynamic instability related to reduced left ventricular contractility, arrhythmias, arterial vasodilation and venoconstriction, and impaired responsiveness to catecholamine vasopressors [7-14]. Dialysis is preferred to the administration of bicarbonate among patients who are volume overloaded because bicarbonate administration results in a large sodium load that may cause or contribute to volume overload. Even among patients who are not volume overloaded on exam, bicarbonate may cause volume overload among patients who are oliguric or anuric and should be used cautiously.In general, we also dialyze patients with AKI and organic acidosis (ie, lactic or ketoacidosis) and pH <7.1, even if they are not volume overloaded and especially if they are oliguric or anuric since such patients are at risk for becoming volume overloaded with bicarbonate therapy.However, among patients with AKI who are not volume overloaded and have no other indication for acute dialysis, bicarbonate may be administered instead of dialysis in the following settings:●Non-anion gap acidosis related to diarrhea. (See "Approach to the adult with metabolic acidosis", section on 'Overview of therapy'.)●Severe organic acidosis (pH <7.1 mEq/L) while awaiting dialysis or in patients in whom the cause of AKI is readily reversible (such as prerenal AKI due to volume depletion or obstruction).●Intravenous bicarbonate may also be indicated among patients with AKI due to rhabdomyolysis in order to prevent further renal injury (ie, ATN), providing other indications for dialysis are not present and the patient is not volume overloaded. This possible indication for bicarbonate is discussed elsewhere. (See "Crush-related acute kidney injury (acute renal failure)".)A reasonable goal for patients with metabolic acidosis due to bicarbonate loss from diarrhea who are treated with bicarbonate is a serum bicarbonate between 20 and 22 mEq/L and pH >7.2 [15]. Among such patients, the total amount of bicarbonate that will be needed can be estimated from the calculated bicarbonate deficit (see "Approach to the adult with metabolic acidosis", section on 'Dosing of alkali therapy (when given)'). The rate of bicarbonate administration is dependent upon severity of acidosis and upon the volume status of the patient.We do not dialyze patients with mild organic acidosis (ie, pH ≥7.1), unless they have another indication. The treatment of such patients is primarily directed at reversing the underlying causes of excessive acid production. This includes the treatment of sepsis and the optimization of ventilation and blood perfusion to minimize lactic acid production and the administration of insulin to patients who have diabetic ketoacidosis. Exogenous sources of acids (such as salicylates) should be removed. The use of bicarbonate is controversial among such patients. We do not give bicarbonate to patients with mild organic acidosis as there are no data that suggest benefit [16]. (See "Bicarbonate therapy in lactic acidosis", section on 'Which patients should receive bicarbonate therapy'.)Two randomized trials failed to find a benefit of bicarbonate therapy in critically ill patients with lactic acidosis and pH values >7.1:●In a crossover study, 14 patients with lactic acidosis (serum bicarbonate <17 mmol/L and arterial lactate >2.5 mmol/L) in a single intensive care unit received, in random order, 2 mmol/kg of sodium bicarbonate and an equivalent dose of sodium chloride [17]. Bicarbonate therapy produced a significant rise in arterial pH (from 7.22 to 7.36) and serum bicarbonate (from 12 to 18 mmol/L). However, the hemodynamic responses to sodium bicarbonate and sodium chloride, including cardiac output, mean arterial pressure, and pulmonary capillary wedge pressure, were identical.●In a similarly designed trial of 10 patients with lactic acidosis, sodium bicarbonate (1 mmol/kg) and an equivalent dose of sodium chloride were administered in random order [12]. Bicarbonate therapy significantly increased the arterial pH (from 7.16 to 7.21) and serum bicarbonate (from 16 to 19 mmol/L). Again, the infusion of sodium bicarbonate and sodium chloride produced similar changes in cardiac output, mean arterial pressure, and pulmonary artery pressure.These two trials were too small to detect a minor benefit of bicarbonate therapy; in addition, patients with severe acidemia were not represented. Thus, we and other experts continue to use bicarbonate therapy in patients who have an arterial pH <7.1. However, bicarbonate therapy requires adequate ventilation, as discussed below. (See "Bicarbonate therapy in lactic acidosis", section on 'Potential harms of bicarbonate and alternative agents'.)Among patients who are receiving bicarbonate for the treatment of severe organic acidosis, we initiate dialysis for those who have an ongoing and increasing demand for bicarbonate to maintain pH despite administered bicarbonate, even if volume overload is not present. However, there are no published data to suggest that a survival benefit is associated with this approach. Thus, some clinicians would favor continuing bicarbonate administration, providing there are no other indications for dialysis, and some would favor just treating the underlying disease process that caused the acidosis. (See "Bicarbonate therapy in lactic acidosis".)Among patients with AKI, bicarbonate administration may be associated with serious side effects. Bicarbonate administration may cause a decrease in the level of ionized or free calcium because of a pH-dependent increase in the binding of calcium to albumin. This could cause or worsen the symptoms of hypocalcemia since symptoms of hypocalcemia reflect from the ionized, not total, calcium. (See 'Hypocalcemia' below.)As in patients without AKI, bicarbonate administration could cause hypernatremia, an increase in the partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pC02) among patients with circulatory or ventilatory compromise, and increased intracranial pressure in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis [18]. (See "Bicarbonate therapy in lactic acidosis".)Hypocalcemia — Serum calcium levels should be closely followed among patients with AKI. Hypocalcemia is common among such patients and is primarily related to increases in serum phosphorus levels caused by reduced GFR [19,20]. Other contributors to hypocalcemia include skeletal resistance to parathyroid hormone and decreased synthesis of 1,25(OH)2D3. (See "Etiology of hypocalcemia in adults".)The serum ionized calcium should be measured in addition to the total serum calcium if a laboratory known to reliably measure ionized calcium is available. The total serum calcium concentration does not accurately reflect the ionized calcium concentration among patients with low- or high-serum albumin levels since calcium is bound to albumin. In addition, since the binding of calcium to albumin is pH dependent, the amount of free calcium may be altered by acid-base disorders or by the rapid correction of such disorders. (See "Diagnostic approach to hypocalcemia" and "Relation between total and ionized serum calcium concentrations".)The treatment of hypocalcemia depends on the severity and presence of symptoms. If the patient is asymptomatic and hyperphosphatemia is present, initial therapy is the correction of hyperphosphatemia. The reduction of serum phosphate as a result of treatment with oral phosphate binders is often sufficient to improve the serum calcium. (See 'Hyperphosphatemia' below.)Symptomatic patients should be more aggressively treated with intravenous calcium (see "Treatment of hypocalcemia"). However, the administration of calcium to patients who are severely hyperphosphatemic may result in the deposition of calcium phosphate into vasculature and organs. Patients with symptomatic hypocalcemia in the presence of serum phosphorus levels >8 to 10 mg/dL (2.6 to 3.2 mmol/L) should be dialyzed to correct both hyperphosphatemia and hypocalcemia. Among such patients, we generally use high-calcium dialysate.Occasionally, patients will develop life-threatening symptoms of hypocalcemia while awaiting dialysis. Such patients should be treated with intermittent intravenous calcium chloride or calcium gluconate, even though there is a risk of metastatic calcification associated with such therapy. We treat with intravenous calcium patients with symptoms of hypocalcemia including paresthesias, tetany (especially carpopedal spasm), confusion, seizures, Trousseau’s sign (carpal spasm occurring after the occlusion of the brachial artery with a blood pressure cuff for three minutes), Chvostek’s sign (contraction of the facial muscle in response to tapping the facial nerve anterior to the ear), or QT prolongation. Initially, intravenous calcium (1 to 2 g of calcium gluconate, equivalent to 90 to 180 mg elemental calcium, in 50 mL of 5 percent dextrose) can be infused over 10 to 20 minutes. The calcium should not be given more rapidly because of the risk of serious cardiac dysfunction, including systolic arrest [21]. This dose of calcium gluconate will raise the serum calcium concentration for only two or three hours while arrangements for dialysis are made. Either 10 percent calcium gluconate (90 mg of elemental calcium per 10 mL) or 10 percent calcium chloride (270 mg of elemental calcium per 10 mL) can be used to prepare the infusion solution. Calcium gluconate is usually preferred because it is less likely to cause tissue necrosis if extravasated. (See "Treatment of hypocalcemia", section on 'Intravenous calcium'.)Hyperphosphatemia — Hyperphosphatemia is observed in many patients with AKI. (See "Overview of the causes and treatment of hyperphosphatemia" and "Tumor lysis syndrome: Definition, pathogenesis, clinical manifestations, etiology and risk factors" and "Acute phosphate nephropathy".)We generally treat with dietary phosphate binders all patients with AKI who have moderately to severely elevated serum phosphate concentrations (ie, >6 mg/dL), although there are no published data that have shown that the treatment of acute hyperphosphatemia related to AKI improves outcomes. We do not treat patients with mild hyperphosphatemia (ie, 4.5 to 6 mg/dL) that is due to AKI.The selection of phosphate binder depends on the level of serum ionized calcium concentration. If the serum ionized calcium concentration is low, calcium-containing phosphate binders such as calcium acetate or calcium carbonate may be given to control serum phosphate levels, providing patients can take oral medications. If the serum ionized calcium concentration is high, non-calcium phosphate binders, such as lanthanum carbonate, sevelamer, or Al(OH)3, should be given. Among such patients, non-calcium binders are preferred in order to prevent increases in the calcium/phosphate product. However, there are no data that have compared outcomes among patients treated with different agents in the setting of AKI. The use of Al(OH)3 should be limited to several days to minimize accumulation of aluminum.There are no specific guidelines at which level to initiate hemodialysis in the setting of hyperphosphatemia, and the decision to initiate hemodialysis is often based upon concomitant clinical and laboratory findings (such as oliguria, development of hypervolemia, hyperkalemia, etc). We generally dialyze patients with severe hyperphosphatemia (defined as >12 mg/dL) since dialysis works more rapidly than phosphate binders and, thus, may be more effective in preventing injury due to the precipitation of calcium and phosphate. As noted above, we also dialyze patients with less severe hyperphosphatemia (serum phosphorus levels defined as >8 to 10 mg/dL) who have symptomatic hypocalcemia. Dialysis may also be used in patients who are unable to take oral medication.Bleeding disorders — AKI can cause a qualitative platelet dysfunction, which results in a hemorrhagic diathesis. The major clinical manifestation of this is cutaneous bleeding, but gastrointestinal bleeding can also occur. In the absence of symptoms, platelet function is generally not assessed in patients with AKI. The clinical manifestations, indications for treatment, and modes of therapy are discussed elsewhere. (See "Platelet dysfunction in uremia".)Indications for dialysis therapy — Accepted indications for dialysis in patients with AKI generally include:●Fluid overload that is refractory to diuretics.●Hyperkalemia (serum potassium concentration >6.5 mEq/L) or rapidly rising potassium levels, refractory to medical therapy.●Metabolic acidosis (pH <7.1) in patients in whom the administration of bicarbonate is not indicated, such as those with volume overload (who would not tolerate the obligate sodium load), or those with lactic acidosis or ketoacidosis, in whom bicarbonate administration has not been shown to be effective.●Signs of uremia such as pericarditis, neuropathy, or an otherwise unexplained decline in mental status.Nonemergent dialysis may also be indicated for patients with prolonged AKI, even in the absence of the indications listed above. The optimal time to start dialysis is not known, and the blood urea nitrogen (BUN) is only one of multiple parameters that may be used to assess dialysis requirement. The optimal timing of the initiation of dialysis is discussed elsewhere. (See "Renal replacement therapy (dialysis) in acute kidney injury (acute renal failure) in adults: Indications, timing, and dialysis dose".)NUTRITION — The major goals of nutritional support for critically ill patients with acute kidney injury (AKI) are to provide adequate amounts of energy, protein, and nutrients [22].Nutritional requirements are dependent on the severity of the underlying disease, preexisting nutritional status, and comorbidities [22]. (See "Nutrition support in critically ill patients: An overview", section on 'Nutritional requirements'.)Although requirements vary based upon the underlying catabolic state, some investigators feel that patients need approximately 25 to 30 kcal/kg per day. Others, however, feel that permissive underfeeding may actually be a preferred approach [23], despite the lack of specific data on underfeeding in AKI [24]. (See "Nutrition support in critically ill patients: An overview", section on 'Calories'.)Protein energy wasting is common among critically ill patients with AKI and contributes to mortality [25]. Protein requirement increases with the severity of the underlying illness and with initiation of dialysis. Whereas nondialysis patients with only mild to moderate illness require only 0.8 to 1.2 g/kg per day, critically ill patients or patients who are on dialysis generally require 1.2 to 1.5 g/kg per day or more [26]. (See "Nutrition support in critically ill patients: An overview", section on 'Protein'.)Providing adequate nutrition to patients with AKI who require dialysis may necessitate parenteral or enteral nutrition. Among critically ill patients without AKI, most clinicians feel that enteral nutrition should be employed in preference to parenteral nutrition whenever possible because of its lower cost, less frequent and severe complications, less mucosal permeability, greater wound healing, and lower rates of infection. (See "Nutrition support in critically ill patients: An overview".)Among patients with AKI, there are limited data concerning the efficacy and safety of enteral nutrition. In one study, enteral nutrition-related outcomes were compared among 247 consecutive patients fed enterally: 114 required dialysis; 68 had AKI, but did not require dialysis; and 65 had normal renal function [27]. Other than an increased incidence of nasogastric tube obstruction and high gastric residual volumes among dialyzed patients, there was no difference in gastrointestinal and mechanical complications in the three groups. The mean amounts of nonprotein calories and protein intake for dialyzed patients were 23.4 kcal/kg and 0.92 g/kg, respectively, with the amount of delivered protein calories being slightly less than recommended. This can be overcome by administering parenteral amino acids during daily dialysis.There are few good studies that have evaluated the safety and efficacy of parenteral nutrition among patients with AKI. A Cochrane review was unable to show an overall benefit of parenteral nutrition on survival, but was limited by poor quality of available studies [28].MONITORING — There are no data to guide the frequency with which serum electrolytes, pH, phosphate, and calcium should be checked. In otherwise stable patients, we generally check serum potassium, sodium, and bicarbonate twice daily, even if initial values are normal, since, as discussed above, the initial creatinine may not reflect the true degree of kidney dysfunction. In the setting of a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of zero, a dangerous increase in serum potassium may result from relatively small shifts of potassium from the intracellular to extracellular compartment or from small amounts of potassium ingested in the diet. Serum potassium should be checked more frequently in patients who have an elevated serum potassium on presentation or who are oliguric or hemodynamically unstable.Total serum calcium, phosphate, and albumin should be measured daily in stable patients. The serum calcium should be measured more frequently (twice daily) in patients who require calcium or bicarbonate.It is important to carefully monitor daily weights, fluid intake, and urine output in order to assess daily fluid balance [29]. In critically ill patients who are incontinent or otherwise unable to monitor urine output due to compromised mental status, an indwelling catheter may be necessary to ensure accurate measurement of urine output. The risks of an indwelling catheter primarily include infection and must be weighed against the potential benefit in each patient. This is discussed elsewhere. (See "Catheter-associated urinary tract infection in adults".)PROGNOSIS — Most patients with acute kidney injury (AKI) recover renal function, with recovery manifested by an increase in urine output and a gradual decrease of the blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and serum creatinine concentration. However many patients, including those with previously normal renal function, do not return to baseline renal function. In addition, many studies have demonstrated an increase in the risk of chronic kidney disease (CKD) and end-stage renal disease (ESRD) among patients who recover from AKI. Even small acute rises in serum creatinine as low as 0.3 mg/dL (27 micromol/L) are associated with both short-term and long-term increases in mortality. This issue is discussed elsewhere. (See "Renal and patient outcomes after acute tubular necrosis".)SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS●Acute kidney injury (AKI) is an abrupt decline in kidney function that results in an elevation of serum blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, and other metabolic waste products that are normally excreted by the kidney. (See 'Introduction' above.)●Potentially life-threatening complications of AKI include volume overload, hyperkalemia, acidosis, and uremia. (See 'Immediate therapy' above.)●Volume status should be assessed in all patients with AKI. Fluid should be given to restore intravascular volume in patients who are volume depleted. The amount of administered fluid and the rate of replacement should be targeted to defined endpoints, such as mean arterial pressure. Types of replacement fluid include colloid- and crystalloid-containing solutions. For patients with AKI who require replacement fluid, we generally use a non-potassium-containing crystalloid solution, such as normal saline, rather than colloid-containing solutions. (See 'Volume issues' above and "Maintenance and replacement fluid therapy in adults".)●Diuretics should not be used for prolonged therapy in place of dialysis. Diuretics may be used for a limited period of time to relieve signs and symptoms of volume overload. Loop diuretics may be more effective than thiazides at a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) <30 mL/min per 1.73 m2. (See 'Volume overload' above.)●The treatment of hyperkalemia is determined by severity and presence of any associated signs, such as electrocardiographic changes or peripheral neuromuscular abnormalities. The treatment of hyperkalemia includes both medical therapy and dialysis. (See "Clinical manifestations of hyperkalemia in adults".)●Metabolic acidosis is common among patients with AKI. In general, we dialyze patients with AKI who are volume overloaded and have a pH <7.1 mEq/L. Dialysis is preferred to the administration of bicarbonate among such patients because bicarbonate administration results in a large sodium load that may cause or contribute to volume overload.Among patients with AKI who are not volume overloaded and have no other indication for acute dialysis, bicarbonate may be used in the setting of a non-anion gap acidosis related to diarrhea, or in patients with a severe organic acidosis while awaiting dialysis. We do not use bicarbonate therapy in patients with a less severe organic acidosis (pH ≥7.1). (See 'Metabolic acidosis' above.)●Hyperphosphatemia and hypocalcemia are commonly observed in patients with AKI. The treatment depends on the degree of hyperphosphatemia and the presence or absence of symptoms from hypocalcemia. (See 'Hyperphosphatemia' above.)•We treat with dietary phosphate binders all patients with AKI who have moderately to severely elevated serum phosphate concentrations (ie, >6 mg/dL). We do not treat patients with mild hyperphosphatemia (ie, 4.5 to 6 mg/dL) that is due to AKI.•We generally dialyze patients with severe hyperphosphatemia (defined as >12 mg/dL [3.9 mmol/L]).•We dialyze patients with less severe hyperphosphatemia (serum phosphorus levels defined as >8 to 10 mg/dL [2.6 to 3.2 mmol/L]) who have symptomatic hypocalcemia.•Dialysis may also be used in patients who are unable to take oral medication.
		
