
			INTRODUCTION — Bronchoscopic laser resection is used to relieve airway obstruction. Its indications, equipment, technique, and outcomes are reviewed here. Other bronchoscopic techniques used to manage airway obstruction are described separately. (See "Endobronchial electrocautery" and "Photodynamic therapy of lung cancer" and "Argon plasma coagulation in the management of airway disease" and "Bronchoscopic cryosurgery: Indications, contraindications, and outcomes" and "Airway stents" and "Flexible bronchoscopy balloon dilation" and "Endobronchial brachytherapy".)INDICATIONS — Bronchoscopic laser resection can relieve malignant or benign intraluminal airway obstruction, particularly exophytic proximal airway lesions, but it has little or no role when the obstruction is caused by extrinsic compression [1,2]:●Malignant disease – Airway obstruction from bronchogenic carcinoma is the most frequent indication for laser resection. It is typically employed in patients who have exhausted their therapeutic options, although some may be eligible for salvage chemotherapy, brachytherapy, or surgical resection [3-5]. Other malignant causes of central airway obstruction that have been managed by laser resection include adenoid cystic carcinoma, mucoepidermoid carcinoma, and endobronchial metastases from melanoma, colon, kidney, and breast cancer [6,7].●Benign disease – Airway obstruction due to a benign lesion may also be amenable to laser resection. Such lesions include benign tumors; inhaled foreign bodies; stenoses due to granulation tissue, intubation injuries, post-radiation strictures, lung transplantation, tracheal or bronchial resection and reanastomosis, or web-like strictures from inhalation injury; fibrous bands following an infection with Corynebacterium diphtheriae, Klebsiella rhinoscleromatis, tuberculosis, or fungus; or benign exophytic disease with either mucosal infiltration or circumferential narrowing due to granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly called Wegener's granulomatosis), tuberculosis, or endometriosis [8,9].Patients who have benign airway strictures due to causes other than infection should always be considered for open surgical resection [3,4]. Candidates for bronchoscopic laser resection include those who are not candidates for open resection because of age, overall medical status, fear of surgery, severity of other underlying disease, or the extent, location, and degree of the stricture. Laser resection can be easily and safely combined with other methods of bronchoscopic treatment, including electrosurgery, cryotherapy, stenting, dilation, and brachytherapy [10]. (See "Endobronchial electrocautery" and "Bronchoscopic cryosurgery: Indications, contraindications, and outcomes" and "Airway stents" and "Flexible bronchoscopy balloon dilation" and "Endobronchial brachytherapy".)TECHNIQUEPrinciples — There are many types of biomedical lasers, including the neodymium-yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Nd:YAG) laser, neodymium-yttrium-aluminum-perovskite (Nd:YAP) laser, carbon dioxide laser, argon ion laser, excimer laser, potassium titanyl phosphate (KTP) laser, alexandrite laser, semiconductor lasers, and pulse dye lasers. These lasers are described in detail separately. (See "Basic principles of medical lasers".) The laser that is most commonly used for bronchoscopic laser resection is the neodymium-yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Nd:YAG) laser. Its energy is delivered through flexible fibers that are inserted through either a rigid or flexible bronchoscope. The wavelength of this laser (1064 nm) is invisible; thus, a red helium-neon beam is used to indicate where the laser energy will be applied.An Nd:YAG laser can remove an obstructing airway lesion in two ways:●Resection (movie 1) – Resection involves directing the laser at the target lesion, devitalizing the lesion via photocoagulation of the feeding blood vessels, and then extracting the devitalized tissue through the bronchoscope. This is possible because the laser penetrates tissue to a depth of up to 10 mm in an inverted cone fashion and provides reliable photocoagulation at this depth. Its power density can be altered by moving the laser closer to or farther from the target tissue. ●Vaporization (movie 2 and movie 3) – Vaporization involves aligning the laser parallel to the bronchial wall and aiming at the edge of the intraluminal lesion (the laser should never be discharged perpendicular to the airway wall because of an increased risk of perforation). Laser pulses of one second or less are used to vaporize the tissue. This is possible because the energy from the laser is relatively well absorbed by water. Vaporization requires higher power densities and more tissue heat than resection. Dark tissues (eg, charred or hemorrhagic tissue) and large lesions require special consideration. With respect to dark tissues, resection should be avoided because the dark color enhances tissue absorption, limits deep tissue penetration, and reduces deep photocoagulation, leading to poor devitalization of the target lesion. With respect to large lesions, vaporization should be avoided because it is time consuming and requires high tissue heat, which may cause fire and perforation. The major disadvantage of the Nd:YAG laser is the operator's inability to predict the extent of deep tissue damage based upon the surface appearance. If the power density increases at a sufficient depth below the surface of the target tissue, the temperature can increase above the boiling point of water. Explosion of a pocket of steam causes a "popcorn effect", which may result in tissue perforation, rupture, and hemorrhage [11].Procedure — The initial step in bronchoscopic laser resection is deciding whether the procedure will be performed via rigid or flexible bronchoscopy. The former is performed in the operating room with general anesthesia, whereas the latter is generally performed in a specially equipped bronchoscopy suite with topical anesthesia and procedural sedation (ie, conscious sedation). (See "Procedural sedation in adults".)The choice of rigid versus flexible bronchoscopy depends upon the bronchoscopist’s experience and preference, as well as whether vaporization or resection of the lesion is planned. Vaporization can be performed with either rigid or flexible bronchoscopy. However, resection is generally performed with rigid bronchoscopy because the devitalized tissue can be more easily removed (ie, during rigid bronchoscopy, tissue can be easily removed with the beveled edge of the bronchoscope, forceps, or suction; with flexible bronchoscopy, tissue is difficult to remove unless the operator is particularly proficient with forceps) [3]. Like most bronchoscopists, we prefer rigid bronchoscopy [12], although we will occasionally use flexible bronchoscopy if the airway abnormality is within a distal segmental bronchus. When we use a rigid bronchoscope, we keep a flexible bronchoscope available to remove blood and debris from the distal airways. This may require abundant saline lavage.After it has been determined whether the procedure will be performed via rigid or flexible bronchoscopy, appropriate personnel need to be recruited. Most laser resection teams are comprised of a bronchoscopist, an anesthesiologist experienced with interventional pulmonology techniques and airway management, an endoscopy nurse familiar with the equipment, and a second endoscopy nurse who assists the bronchoscopist and controls the laser settings. For bronchoscopy performed in the operating room, it is also helpful to have a circulating nurse available in case of complications, since both endoscopy nurses will usually be occupied assisting the bronchoscopist. When procedures are performed using general anesthesia, the patient’s oxygenation and ventilation are supported throughout the procedure by spontaneous-assisted ventilation, jet ventilation, or laryngeal mask assisted ventilation [13-15]. Muscle relaxants and paralytic agents can occasionally be helpful during general anesthesia because they prevent the patient from “bucking the vent” or coughing during resection and they facilitate insertion of the rigid bronchoscope. However, such agents should be used sparingly and only after careful consideration of the potential risks and benefits for the following reasons. Muscle relaxants and paralytic agents allow the airways to narrow when the rib cage relaxes and this can cause airway obstruction, increase the amount of ventilator support that is required during the procedure, and increase the risk of complications if intubation fails because the patient is unable to breathe spontaneously. Bronchoscopic laser resection should only be performed by bronchoscopists who have advanced training and experience. Bronchoscopists and team members should remain familiar with techniques, potential complications, and necessary precautions [16]. Precautions during laser resection include wearing protective goggles, protecting the patient's eyes with saline-soaked pads and aluminum foil to avoid injury from accidental laser scatter, and minimizing the risk of combustion:●The fraction of inspired oxygen should be kept below 40 percent during laser firing [17]●Flammable materials should be kept far away from the operating field ●Silicone stents should be removed prior to laser firing [17]●The laser should always be placed on standby mode while tissue is removed from the bronchoscope●Adequate suction must be available to remove the combustible laser plume (the smoke caused by vaporization of tissues) [18]●Power settings should not exceed the maximum recommended for the laser being used (eg, 40 watts for the Nd:YAG laser) ●If a flexible bronchoscope is employed, the laser must be kept a sufficient distance beyond the tip of the bronchoscopeVideo systems allow all personnel to observe the procedure, which makes it easier for assistants to anticipate the needs of the bronchoscopist and the patient. Many bronchoscopic laser resection procedures are performed in less than one hour [19].Complications — Complications of bronchoscopic laser resection are infrequent but they include hemorrhage, airway wall perforation, airway wall necrosis, and fistula formation. Arterial air embolism rarely complicates bronchoscopic laser resection, but may cause myocardial ischemia or a cerebrovascular accident. Studies of laser procedures performed during continuous transesophageal echocardiographic monitoring suggest that air emboli may be caused by coolant gas (which exits the bronchoscope under high flow and pressure conditions to cool the laser probe) entering the pulmonary venules and gaining access to the systemic circulation [20]. The frequency of this complication may be reduced by maintaining the laser fiber coolant airflow at the minimum level and avoiding direct contact between the laser probe and tissue. (See "Air embolism".)OUTCOMES — Outcome data regarding bronchoscopic laser resection are sparse. However, it appears to be a rapid and safe method to relieve airway obstruction [1,21]. A case series that included 2610 laser resections in 1838 patients with malignant airway obstruction found that airway patency improved and symptoms were palliated in over 90 percent of patients [12]. The median time between a first and second palliative treatment was 102 days. Mortality was less than 1 percent within seven days of the procedure. Smaller series have reported similar results [22-25], while a larger series reported that death occurred in only 15 out of 5049 patients (0.3 percent) and serious complications occurred in only 119 out of 5049 patients (2.4 percent) [26].Emergency laser resection can favorably affect healthcare utilization. Rapid patient improvement is frequently observed and may allow weaning from mechanical ventilation and transfer to a lower level of care [27].SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS●Bronchoscopic laser resection is used to relieve malignant or benign intraluminal airway obstruction. It has little or no role when the obstruction is caused by extrinsic compression. (See 'Indications' above.)●The type of laser that is most commonly used for bronchoscopic laser resection is the neodymium-yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Nd:YAG) laser. It relieves airway obstruction by either resecting or vaporizing the obstructing lesion. (See 'Principles' above.)●The initial step in bronchoscopic laser resection is deciding whether the procedure will be performed via rigid or flexible bronchoscopy. The former is performed in the operating room with general anesthesia, whereas the latter is generally performed in a specially equipped bronchoscopy suite with topical anesthesia and procedural sedation (ie, conscious sedation). Vaporization can be performed with either rigid or flexible bronchoscopy, but resection is generally performed with rigid bronchoscopy. (See 'Procedure' above.)●Bronchoscopic laser resection should only be performed by bronchoscopists who have advanced training and experience. Laser teams generally consist of the bronchoscopist, an anesthesiologist, and two endoscopy nurses. For procedures performed in the operating room, it is also helpful to have a circulating nurse available. Many procedures are performed in less than one hour. (See 'Procedure' above.)●Bronchoscopic laser resection appears to be a rapid and safe method to relieve airway obstruction Complications are infrequent but they include hemorrhage, airway wall perforation, airway wall necrosis, fistula formation, and air embolism. (See 'Outcomes' above and 'Complications' above.)
		
