
			INTRODUCTION — The right ventricle (RV) has historically received less attention than its counterpart of the left side of the heart, yet there is a substantial body of evidence showing that RV size and function are perhaps equally important in predicting adverse outcomes in cardiovascular disease. RV dysfunction is associated with excess morbidity and mortality in patients with chronic left-sided heart failure, acute myocardial infarction (with or without RV involvement), pulmonary embolism, pulmonary arterial hypertension, and congenital heart disease [1-3]. Advances in noninvasive imaging of the RV, particularly with echocardiography, have yielded insights into the pathophysiology of this complex and once elusive chamber.In an attempt to standardize the echocardiographic evaluation of the right heart, the American Society of Echocardiography has published guidelines regarding what measures should be performed and what cutoff values should be employed to identify right ventricular pathology [4]. This topic will review the echocardiographic assessment of the right heart, specifically the right atrium and right ventricle. The echocardiographic assessment of right-sided heart valves is presented separately. (See "Echocardiographic evaluation of the tricuspid valve" and "Echocardiographic evaluation of the pulmonic valve and pulmonary artery".) RIGHT VENTRICULAR ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY — The right atrium (RA) transmits and pumps blood across the tricuspid valve into the right ventricle (RV), which then ejects the stroke volume through the pulmonic valve and into the main pulmonary artery. In the absence of shunt, stroke volume of the right heart is obligately equal to that of the left.The right heart differs from the left in terms of anatomy and physiology. The RV loosely resembles a pyramid and is composed of three portions: the inlet, the body, and the outflow tract. Contraction is generated by a deep layer of longitudinal fibers that cause base to apex motion, and a superficial layer of circumferential fibers that result in inwards thickening (movie 1) [5]. The RV lacks a third layer of spiral fibers as seen in the left ventricle.The RV end-diastolic volume is slightly greater than that of the left ventricle, and as a result has a slightly lower ejection fraction. RV ejection is accomplished with a mass that is approximately one-fifth that of the left ventricle. Accordingly, the RV is well suited as a volume pump, but is prone to failure when faced with an acute pressure challenge.These anatomic and physiologic features, coupled with the less accessible retrosternal position of the RV, have resulted in many challenges in the noninvasive evaluation of RV dimensions and function by echocardiography.CHAMBER SIZE AND WALL THICKNESS — Changes in right heart chamber size are often suspected, and subsequently described, using qualitative rather than quantitative features. As an example, the right ventricle (RV) cavity size may be described as “as large as” (suggestive of moderate dilation) or “larger than” (suggestive of severe dilation) the left ventricle in the apical four chamber view, or the RV may be described as “apex-forming.” In daily practice, the RV size, relative to left ventricle (LV) size, is often also considered from the parasternal long-axis view (if RV is equal or larger than LV, then it is considered enlarged). Given the complex and multifaceted configuration of the RV, all available echocardiographic views should be reviewed to obtain a comprehensive assessment. Beyond qualitatively describing the visual appearance of the RV, however, validated quantitative measurements of right heart size (for both the right atrium [RA] and RV) should be performed as part of a comprehensive echocardiographic assessment (table 1). (See 'Right atrial size' below and 'Right ventricular size' below.)Right atrial size — Emerging data have suggested that RA enlargement is an important prognostic marker for patients with various types of cardiopulmonary disease and should be routinely measured in the echocardiography lab (table 1).●In a study of 81 patients with primary pulmonary hypertension followed for an average of 37 months, RA area (indexed to height) was one of only two echocardiographic predictors of mortality [6].●In a study of 192 patients with chronic systolic heart failure followed for an average of 36 months, RA volume indexed to body surface area was found to be predictive of mortality, need for heart transplantation, or hospitalization for heart failure, an association that persisted after adjusting for age, left ventricular ejection fraction, right ventricular systolic function, and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) [7].●Atrial fibrillation and flutter may originate from electrophysiologic perturbations within the RA, and RA enlargement has been shown to be a risk factor for the development of these arrhythmias [8,9].RA area — The preferred echocardiographic measure of RA size is RA area. RA area is measured by planimetry of the atrial cavity in the apical four chamber view at end-systole (when the atrial cavity is at its largest) (image 1). When tracing the endocardial contour, the area below the tricuspid annulus, the superior and inferior vena cava, and the RA appendage should be excluded. The normal reference limit (table 1) for RA area is ≤18 cm2 [4]. RA linear dimensions — RA linear dimensions can also be measured in the apical four chamber view at end-systole (image 1). The normal reference limits (table 1) for RA major-axis dimension (superior-inferior, from the center of the tricuspid annular plane to the uppermost aspect of the RA wall) and minor-axis dimension (left-right, from the interatrial septum to the rightmost aspect of the RA wall) are ≤5.3 cm and ≤4.4 cm, respectively [4]. RA volume — RA volume can be measured by planimetry of the atrial cavity in two orthogonal views using the biplane ellipsoid formula or by 3D-echocardiography using the method of discs. The approach for measurement of RA volumes, as well as the range of normal values, has yet to be standardized.Right ventricular size — RV enlargement may be caused by states of acute or chronic pressure overload, chronic volume overload, or intrinsic myocardial pathology (table 2), often indicating severe and/or advanced disease with a relatively poor prognosis.●In patients with moderate-to-severe chronic pulmonary disease, the basal diameter of the RV (measured at end-diastole and indexed to body surface area) was readily obtained in 92 percent of patients and was the most significant predictor of mortality over a follow-up period of 16 months [10].●A large registry of patients presenting with acute pulmonary embolism demonstrated that relative RV enlargement, as suggested by an RV to LV end-diastolic diameter ratio ≥0.9, was predictive of in-hospital mortality and may be useful in identifying which patients require more aggressive therapy [11].●For patients with repaired tetralogy of Fallot and residual-free pulmonary regurgitation, RV size is vigilantly monitored to determine the timing of pulmonary valve replacement. Although typically measured by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to achieve high accuracy [12], reports suggest that three-dimensional echocardiography provides similar measurements of RV volume [13].●Tricuspid regurgitation in the absence of organic tricuspid valve pathology, termed functional tricuspid regurgitation, is highly prevalent in patients with right heart disease, particularly those with chronic right ventricular pressure overload. RV enlargement, and more specifically, dilation of the basal annular portion of the RV, is one of the major causative factors. (See "Etiology, clinical features, and evaluation of tricuspid regurgitation", section on 'Functional TR'.)RV area — Due to the complex shape of the RV, there is no single representative two-dimensional measure of RV size, and any given measure has limited correlation with actual RV volume as measured by pathology or MRI, especially when the RV cavity is dilated [14]. The area of the body and apex of the RV is measured by planimetry of the ventricular cavity in the apical four chamber view at end-diastole (image 2). When tracing the endocardial contour, care must be taken to trace along the true border of the RV wall rather than the prominent trabeculations or moderator band (image 3). The normal reference limit (table 1) for RV end-diastolic area is ≤25 cm2 [4]. Two common sources of error, resulting in underestimation of RV area, are:●Tracing too far into the RV cavity along the border of the noncompacted RV trabeculations (image 3).●Accidentally excluding the apex of the RV by tracing the inferior border along the moderator band rather than the true apex (image 3). RV linear dimensions — RV linear dimensions are measured in the apical four chamber view, ideally using the RV-focused view, at end-diastole (image 2). The normal reference limits (table 1) for RV basal dimension (maximal diameter in the basal one-third of the RV) and RV mid-cavity dimension (midway between the apex and annular plane) are ≤4.2 and ≤3.5 cm, respectively [4]. The RV basal dimension is recommended as the preferred standard basic measure of RV size to be reported. Two common sources of error with the measurement of RV linear dimensions are:●Acquiring a non-optimized four chamber view that results in underestimation of RV size (figure 1). ●Acquiring or making measurements on the RV-modified apical four chamber view that results in overestimation of RV size (image 4). Therefore, it is critical to optimize the RV-focused apical four chamber view (movie 2). This is accomplished by ensuring that the transducer is positioned over the apex of the heart (and not over the body of the RV as in the RV-modified apical four chamber view), tilted to bring the entire RV into the imaging sector, and rotated until the maximal RV dimension is in-plane.RVOT dimension — The proximal right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) dimension is measured from the front of the RV/RVOT anteriorly to the aortic root posteriorly; it can be measured in the parasternal long-axis or parasternal short-axis view (image 5) and the normal reference limits (table 1) are ≤3.3 and ≤3.5 cm, respectively [4]. The distal RVOT diameter, commonly used in the calculation of RV stroke volume, is measured just proximal to the insertion of the pulmonary valve leaflets in the parasternal short-axis view (image 5) with the normal reference limit being ≤2.7 cm [4].RV volume — Two-dimensional estimates of RV volume are not recommended due to their inherent geometric assumptions and lack of full representation of the different RV regions (often resulting in substantial underestimation of true RV volume). However, three-dimensional measurements of RV volume have largely overcome these limitations and can be obtained using one of two preferred approaches (see "Three-dimensional echocardiography", section on 'Assessment of right ventricular volumes'):●Method of discs — Starting with a full volume acquisition of the RV, the user manually traces the endocardial border of the RV in a series of consecutive short-axis slices or orthogonal long-axis slices. The software algorithm segments the RV into contiguous discs of fixed height (usually 10 mm) from base to apex, and sums the volumes of the contiguous discs to calculate a global RV volume.●3D surface modeling platforms — Also starting with a full volume acquisition of the RV, the user manually identifies specified RV landmarks or contours and the proprietary software algorithm proceeds to fit a 3D model and calculate global and regional RV volumes (image 6). The latter approach has become increasingly popular due to its ease and speed of use, close correlation with cardiac MRI [15,16], and availability of normative data (normal reference limit for RV end-diastolic volume <86 mL and, when indexed, <49 mL/m2) [17].Of note, three-dimensional echocardiographic measurement of RV volumes or RV ejection fraction has not yet been recommended as a routine part of the basic echocardiographic study owing to a paucity of normative data, as well as challenges in obtaining the excellent image quality required for accurate reconstruction [18]. Wall thickness — RV hypertrophy is recognized by inspecting the wall of the RV outflow tract in the precordial views, the free wall in the apical view, and the diaphragmatic wall in the subcostal view. Generally, the RV free wall in diastole is approximately 3 to 4 mm thick; if it exceeds 5 mm, it is considered hypertrophied (image 7) [19,20].RV wall thickness, when inspected or measured in the subcostal view, allows differentiation of the wall thickness from cavity trabeculations [21]. Contrast enhancement of M-mode or two-dimensional images can aid in measuring wall thickness [22,23].INTERVENTRICULAR SEPTAL SHAPE — A D-shaped left ventricular cavity (also referred to as a flattened interventricular septum) in systole (particularly end-systole), or in systole and diastole, suggests right ventricular (RV) pressure overload, whereas a D-shaped left ventricular cavity in diastole suggests RV volume overload (image 8). RIGHT VENTRICULAR FUNCTION — The predominant motion of the right ventricle (RV) is longitudinal shortening, visible as systolic descent of the basal free wall toward the apex. A secondary motion is radial thickening, visible (albeit less readily) as systolic thickening of the myocardium. Unlike the left ventricle, circumferential shortening is negligible in the RV, owing to its lack of circumferential fibers. The quantitative echocardiographic parameters used to measure RV systolic function reflect either longitudinal shortening or global RV performance.Tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) — TAPSE, sometimes referred to as tricuspid annular motion (TAM), reflects longitudinal shortening of the RV. TAPSE is measured in the apical four chamber view by placing an M-mode cursor on the lateral tricuspid annulus and measuring the peak distance travelled by this reference point during systole (image 9). A greater distance travelled during systole implies greater RV systolic function, with the normal reference limit (table 1) being a TAPSE of ≥1.6 cm [24,25].The primary limitation of TAPSE is that it only represents one component of RV motion within one single segment of RV myocardium. The RV may be frankly dysfunctional despite relatively preserved TAPSE, as in some cases of severe pulmonary hypertension (movie 3). Alternatively, the RV function may be globally normal despite significantly reduced TAPSE, as often seen after cardiac surgery [26,27].Two common sources of error with TAPSE are:●Not placing the M-mode cursor parallel to the plane of longitudinal motion, which results in angle-dependent underestimation of TAPSE.●Incorrectly measuring the magnitude of displacement.These issues aside, TAPSE remains one of the most widely used measures of RV systolic function since it is easily obtained and has been shown to have robust diagnostic and prognostic value in several disease states. ●In patients with pre-capillary pulmonary hypertension, TAPSE has been shown to correlate well with MRI-derived RV ejection fraction and predict long-term mortality [1,28].●In patients presenting with inferior myocardial infarction, a reduced TAPSE was found to be a rapid and accurate indicator of RV infarction even when no RV regional wall motion abnormalities could be identified [29].●In three separate series of patients with chronic left-sided systolic heart failure, up to 50 percent of patients were found to have a reduced TAPSE, a finding that was associated with a significant increase in long-term mortality [30-32].Tricuspid annular velocity (S’) — Akin to TAPSE that reflects the longitudinal displacement, S’ reflects the longitudinal velocity of the tricuspid annulus during systole. S’ is measured in the apical four chamber view by placing a tissue Doppler cursor on the lateral tricuspid annulus and measuring the peak velocity of this reference point during systole (image 10). Care should be taken to measure the peak of the ejection waveform and not the earlier isovolumetric contraction waveform. A greater velocity during systole implies greater RV systolic function, with the normal reference limit (table 1) being an S’ of ≥10 cm/s. Both pulsed tissue Doppler and color-coded tissue Doppler can be used to measure S’, although the color-coded method yields mean velocities that are usually slightly lower [33]. The ultrasound transducer may be slightly tilted to optimize the alignment of the Doppler cursor with the plane of RV longitudinal motion.The advantages and limitations are the same as TAPSE: S’ is simple to perform and has prognostic data, yet it is angle-dependent and only represents the longitudinal annular component of RV motion.Like TAPSE, S’ appears to have prognostic value in a variety of clinical situations. S’ has been shown to correlate well with magnetic resonance imaging-derived (MRI) RV ejection fraction [34,35] and demonstrates prognostic value in patients with pulmonary hypertension [36,37], inferior myocardial infarction [29,38], chronic heart failure [39,40], and arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy [41,42].Fractional area change (FAC) — FAC is the percent change in RV area from diastole to systole, a two-dimensional surrogate for ejection fraction, and thereby reflects the systolic function of the inflow and apical portions of the RV. FAC is not limited to one type of motion, but rather encompasses longitudinal shortening as well as radial thickening and the contribution of the interventricular septum. It is measured in the apical four chamber view by manually tracing the contour of the RV at end-diastole (when the ventricular cavity is at its largest) and at end-systole (when the ventricular cavity is at its smallest) (image 11). The FAC is calculated as follows:●FAC = [(end-diastolic RV area – end-systolic RV area) / end-diastolic RV area] x 100The normal reference limit (table 1) for FAC is ≥35 percent [4]. The primary challenge and main limitation of FAC is the accurate identification and tracing of the true RV endocardial border rather than the prominent trabeculations and muscle bands (image 3). (See 'RV area' above.)FAC appears to be an excellent compromise between efficiency of use and global representation of RV systolic function. Compared to other two-dimensional measures of RV systolic function such as TAPSE and S’, FAC was found to correlate best with the reference standard of MRI-derived RV ejection fraction (R = 0.80) [43].●In substudies from the SAVE and VALIANT trials, 416 and 522 patients with acute myocardial infarction and evidence of left ventricular dysfunction underwent complete echocardiographic assessment [44,45]. Four independent predictors of subsequent all-cause mortality were identified: age, Killip classification, LV ejection fraction, and FAC, with FAC <35 percent carrying an adjusted hazard ratio of 3.56 (95% CI 1.07-11.90).●In the Multidisciplinary Study of Right Ventricular Dysplasia, FAC was found to be significantly reduced in probands compared with normal controls [46]. The revised arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) Task Force Criteria list FAC ≤33 percent as a major diagnostic criteria, and FAC 34 to 40 percent as a minor criteria (no other two-dimensional echocardiographic measures of function were recommended) [47]. (See "Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy", section on 'Diagnosis'.)Myocardial performance index (MPI) — MPI, also referred to as right ventricular index of myocardial performance (RIMP) or right ventricular Tei index, reflects both the systolic and diastolic function of the RV [48]. Contrary to the TAPSE, S’, and FAC, the MPI is based on time intervals and is independent of chamber geometry and contraction pattern. The MPI was once thought to also be independent of loading conditions, although this has been subsequently proven to be false [49]. The MPI is derived by calculating the ratio of isovolumetric time over ejection time as follows:●MPI = (isovolumetric relaxation time + isovolumetric contraction time) / ejection time = (tricuspid closure-to-opening time – ejection time) / ejection timeLower values indicate superior function since the healthy RV should theoretically spend a lower relative proportion of time in an isovolumetric state and a greater proportion ejecting blood. The MPI can be measured in one of two ways (image 12 and image 13). For both methods of measuring MPI, the expertise of the observer is crucial since the time intervals being measured are often difficult to delineate, and small variations can lead to substantial differences in the final calculated value [4].●Pulsed Doppler method – The ejection time is derived from the pulsed wave Doppler tracing of the distal right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) or the continuous wave Doppler tracing of the tricuspid regurgitation jet; the tricuspid-closure-opening time is derived from the pulsed wave Doppler tracing of the tricuspid inflow; and the total isovolumetric time is derived from the difference between the tricuspid-closure-opening time and the ejection time (image 13). The normal reference limit for the pulsed Doppler MPI is ≤0.40.●Tissue Doppler method – The ejection time, tricuspid-closure-opening time, and total isovolumetric time are all derived from the pulsed tissue Doppler tracing of the lateral tricuspid annulus (image 12). The normal reference limit for the tissue Doppler MPI is ≤0.55. This method has the distinct advantage of being measured from a single acquisition in a single heartbeat.  MPI is particularly well suited to two clinical scenarios: First, since MPI is often affected before other functional parameters, it is a more sensitive parameter to evaluate subclinical or early RV dysfunction. Second, since MPI is non-geometric in nature and relies solely on time intervals to derive a measure of RV function, it is useful to evaluate an RV which is oddly shaped or poorly visualized.Similar to TAPSE, S’, and FAC, MPI appears to have prognostic value in a variety of clinical conditions. Abnormal RV MPI has been linked to adverse outcomes in several disease states [50-57], and has been used to predict response to therapy in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension and chronic thromboembolic disease [58,59].Other measures — RV ejection fraction is calculated based on measurements of end-diastolic and end-systolic RV volumes; therefore, the limitations pertaining to two-dimensional assessment of RV volumes apply and a three-dimensional approach is preferred. Notwithstanding the paucity of normative and prognostic data at the present time, with adequate image quality, three-dimensional RV ejection fraction using either the method of discs or surface modeling is the most accurate echocardiographic measure of global RV systolic function. The normal reference limit for 3D-derived RVEF is ≥44 percent. (See 'RV volume' above.)Strain is defined as the percent change in myocardial deformation (predominantly longitudinal shortening in the case of the RV), while its derivative strain rate is defined as the rate of myocardial deformation. These are measured using either a tissue Doppler (angle-dependent) or speckle tracking (non-angle-dependent) approach. Potential benefits include unique abilities to reflect the intrinsic contractility of the RV, evaluate diastolic properties, perform regional analyses, and identify subclinical dysfunction [60,61]. In addition to the paucity of normative and prognostic data, the major drawback limiting clinical applicability has been technical challenges in image acquisition and analysis (need for high frame rates, high signal-to-noise, minimal image dropout, experienced observers for reproducible measurements). Contemporary speckle-tracking algorithms have enhanced reproducibility and are beginning to yield clinically relevant observations. (See "Tissue Doppler echocardiography".) Diastolic function of the RV, although infrequently considered, can be assessed by echocardiography in a fashion similar to the left ventricle using pulsed wave Doppler interrogation of the trans-tricuspid inflow, tissue Doppler interrogation of the lateral tricuspid annulus, and evaluation of RA pressure using inferior vena cava size and collapsibility and hepatic vein flow pattern. A more detailed description of RV diastolic function assessment is beyond the scope of this article, and has been summarized in the American Society of Echocardiography Guidelines [4].HEMODYNAMICS — In addition to the anatomic and functional parameters, the comprehensive echocardiographic examination provides an assessment of right heart hemodynamics. Integration of these three components (anatomy, function, and hemodynamics) is vital to enable the clinician to understand and delineate the pathophysiology at hand.RA pressure — Estimation of right atrium pressure (RAP) is clinically relevant in many circumstances:●As an indicator of volume status and responsiveness to fluid challenge in critically ill patients●As a sensitive diagnostic sign in patients with suspected cardiac tamponade or other pericardial syndromes●As part of the echocardiographic estimation of pulmonary artery pressureRAP is determined based on the diameter and degree of collapse of the inferior vena cava (IVC) imaged from the subcostal view during quiet inspiration and during rapid inspiration (“sniff”) (movie 4) [4,62,63]. Overly forceful inspiration should be discouraged, as this can cause translation of the IVC out of the imaging plane. RAP is typically estimated as follows (table 3):●Normal RAP (3 mmHg): IVC diameter ≤2.1 cm and collapse during sniff >50 percent.●Intermediate RAP (8 mmHg): IVC diameter ≤2.1 cm and collapse during sniff <50 percent OR IVC diameter >2.1 cm and collapse during sniff >50 percent.●Elevated RAP (15 mmHg): IVC diameter >2.1 cm and collapse <50 percent. The interpreter, however, may upgrade or downgrade the intermediate RAP value based on secondary indices that suggest either normal or elevated right-sided pressures (RA enlargement), right ventricular hypertrophy, diastolic predominance in the hepatic veins, restrictive filling pattern in the trans-tricuspid inflow, or tricuspid E/e’ >6 [64-66]. In some subjects with markedly elevated RAP, the “elevated” category of 15 mmHg may be an underestimate, and this should be considered in certain clinical scenarios. In mechanical ventilated subjects, the use of IVC size and collapse to estimate RAP is less reliable, although this notion has been challenged [67]. The use of the above algorithm is definitely preferable over an assumed RAP of 5 or 10 mmHg for all patients.The IVC is occasionally dilated in healthy young subjects and in athletes, in which case the IVC size can be reassessed in the left lateral decubitus position and ancillary signs of elevated RAP can be verified (hepatic vein flow pattern showing diastolic predominance, ie, diastolic wave >systolic wave). If the IVC appears plethoric and there is no suggestion of right heart pathology, positioning the patient in the left lateral decubitus position may cause the IVC to collapse normally with inspiration, and may be interpreted as normal RAP.Pulmonary artery pressure — Estimation of pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) is an important aspect of the echocardiographic study, particularly in the evaluation of dyspnea, and in patients with evidence of cardiac pathology. The simplified Bernoulli equation, ΔP = 4V2, estimates the pressure drop across two chambers (ΔP) based on the peak velocity (V) in the presence of turbulent flow. Thus, the tricuspid regurgitation velocity (TRV) as measured by continuous wave Doppler is equal to the systolic pressure in the RV (RVSP) minus the systolic pressure in the RA (RAP). In the absence of right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) obstruction or pulmonic valve stenosis, RVSP is equivalent to the systolic pulmonary artery pressure (sPAP). This equation is re-arranged to yield [68]:●sPAP ≅ RVSP = 4(TRV2) + RAPCare must be taken to optimize the Doppler gain to avoid overestimation of the velocity, and only complete Doppler envelopes should be used (image 14). Agitated saline or blood contrast may be given to augment the Doppler signal. Additionally, as with all Doppler measurements, it is critical to minimize the angle of incidence of the cursor to avoid underestimating the TR velocity. Accordingly, the TR jet should be interrogated from multiple views (movie 5A-B), including the RV inflow view, parasternal short axis, apical four chamber, and occasionally the subcostal window when the TR jet is highly medially directed. sPAP rises slightly with increasing age and body surface area [69].In general, echocardiographically-estimated sPAP exceeding 35 to 40 mmHg should be considered elevated, particularly in patients being evaluated for dyspnea. Despite the sound physiologic basis for the echocardiographic estimation of sPAP, confirmation of sPAP by invasive right heart catheterization should be considered prior to making important treatment decisions. (See "Pulmonary artery catheterization: Indications and complications" and "Pulmonary artery catheterization: Interpretation of tracings".)Echocardiography can also be used to estimate mean and diastolic pulmonary artery pressures, using either the tricuspid or pulmonary regurgitation velocity, or the acceleration time (time to reach peak velocity in the distal RVOT flow tracing measured by pulsed wave Doppler), as follows:●Diastolic PAP = 4V2end PR velocity + RAP●Mean PAP = 4V2early PR velocity + RAP●Mean PAP = 79 – [(0.45)(Acceleration time)]●Systolic PAP = 10[(-0.004)(Acceleration time) + 2.1]●Mean PAP = (⅓ sPAP) + (⅔ dPAP)These values may be reported in patients with right heart pathology, or may be used as surrogate measures of PAP when there is no adequate TR signal to estimate sPAP. Furthermore, the combination of acceleration time ≤60 msec and sPAP ≤60 mmHg, termed the 60/60 sign, has been proposed as an echocardiographic sign to identify patients with acute pulmonary embolism [70].Right ventricular wall thickness >0.5 cm may corroborate the finding of (chronically) elevated sPAP. This measurement is typically obtained in the subcostal or parasternal view at end-diastole using two-dimensional images or M-mode. Because of the thin walled nature of the RV, and the overlying layers of pericardium and fat, this measurement is often difficult to reliably perform.Pulmonary vascular resistance — The determinants of pressure are flow and resistance, according to the formula P = QR, where pressure (P) is equal to the product of flow (Q) and resistance (R). There are situations whereby stroke volume is markedly increased, without an increase in pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR). The sPAP may therefore be elevated, but the pathological or clinical implications are not the same as in the setting of increased resistance. By using a measure of flow (velocity time integral [VTI] of the RVOT) and a measure of pressure (TRV), a simple regression formula can be used to estimate PVR [71]:PVR = [(TRV / RVOT VTI) x 10] + 0.16This yields a value in Wood units (WU), and maintains a good correlation with invasively measured PVR up to approximately 8 WU [72]. This measure has not been validated for clinical use or to prognosticate patients, and should not replace invasive hemodynamic measurements. It may be useful, however, to screen for pulmonary hypertension related to high flow states or in athletes, both at rest and with exercise. Of note, using the principles elaborated above, when the RV fails, and the stroke volume decreases, one may observe a fall in sPAP.There are several other ancillary findings that should be used to assess for RV overload. A D-shaped left ventricular cavity (also referred to as a flattened interventricular septum) in systole, or in systole and diastole, suggests RV pressure overload (image 8), whereby a D-shaped left ventricular cavity in diastole suggests RV volume overload. Other findings — Mid-systolic notching of the RVOT pulsed wave Doppler flow signal or pulmonary valve M-Mode signal suggests increased PVR (image 15) [73,74]. This finding reflects a prominent reflected wave, and has been used to refine estimates of PVR using the formula: PVR = (PASP/ RVOT VTI) + 3 if a mid-systolic notching of the RVOT is present [75]. In addition, when assessing for increased PAP or PVR, corroborative signs of right-sided dilation, right ventricular overload, and right ventricular dysfunction should be sought. (See 'Chamber size and wall thickness' above and 'Interventricular septal shape' above and 'Right ventricular function' above.)CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED WITH RIGHT VENTRICULAR PATHOLOGY — The right ventricle (RV) can be pathologically abnormal in response to a number of situations and conditions, many of which have characteristics that permit echocardiographic differentiation (table 4). RV pathology can be due to volume or pressure overload from a variety of etiologies (eg, valvular disease, congenital heart disease, etc). In addition, primary myopathic processes or tumors can result in RV pathology. Complete discussions of the following conditions are presented separately:Conditions associated with RV volume overload●Atrial septal defect (see "Identification and assessment of atrial septal defects in adults" and "Indications for closure and medical management of atrial septal defects in adults")●Valvular regurgitation (tricuspid or pulmonic regurgitation) (see "Etiology, clinical features, and evaluation of tricuspid regurgitation" and "Management and prognosis of tricuspid regurgitation" and "Echocardiographic evaluation of the pulmonic valve and pulmonary artery", section on 'Pulmonic valve regurgitation')Conditions associated with RV pressure overload●Pulmonary arterial hypertension (idiopathic, heritable, drug-induced, HIV, connective tissue diseases) (see "Overview of pulmonary hypertension in adults")●Acute or chronic thromboembolic disease (see "Overview of acute pulmonary embolism in adults", section on 'Clinical presentation, evaluation, and diagnosis' and "Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension" and "Overview of the treatment of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension")•Pulmonary hypertension due to left heart diseases (eg, systolic dysfunction, diastolic dysfunction, valvular heart disease). (See "Pathophysiology of cardiogenic pulmonary edema", section on 'Predisposing conditions'.)•Pulmonary hypertension due to lung diseases and/or hypoxemia. (See "Pulmonary hypertension associated with interstitial lung disease".)•Pulmonary valve or supra-valvular stenosis (see "Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of pulmonic stenosis in adults", section on 'Supravalvular pulmonic stenosis')•RV outflow obstruction (see "Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of pulmonic stenosis in adults" and "Pathophysiology, clinical features, and diagnosis of tetralogy of Fallot")Cardiomyopathic conditions associated with RV pathology●RV ischemia or infarction (see "Right ventricular myocardial infarction")●Dilated cardiomyopathy (see "Evaluation of the patient with heart failure or cardiomyopathy" and "Echocardiographic recognition of cardiomyopathies", section on 'Right ventricle')●Arrhythmogenic RV cardiomyopathy (see "Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy")●Endomyocardial fibrosis (see "Endomyocardial fibrosis")●Other cardiomyopathies affecting the RV and the left ventricle (eg, cardiac amyloidosis, stress-induced cardiomyopathy) (See "Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of amyloid cardiomyopathy" and "Stress (takotsubo) cardiomyopathy".)Tumors involving the RV●Cardiac myxomas (see "Cardiac tumors", section on 'Myxomas')●Other primary cardiac tumors (eg, sarcomas, fibromas, rhabdomyomas) (see "Cardiac tumors")●Metastatic lesions (eg, melanoma, renal cell carcinoma) (see "Cardiac tumors", section on 'Secondary cardiac tumors' and "Clinical manifestations, evaluation, and staging of renal cell carcinoma")SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS●Assessment of the right heart is a critical component of every echocardiographic study. Measurement of chamber dimensions, evaluation of right ventricle (RV) systolic function, and estimation of hemodynamic parameters (eg, right atrial [RA] pressure, systolic pulmonary artery pressure [sPAP]) should be routinely performed.●When feasible, the following core measurements (table 1) should be reported in all studies (with additional measurements performed and reported as clinically indicated):•RV basal diameter from the RV-focused apical four chamber view (normal ≤4.2 cm) (See 'Right ventricular size' above.)•RA area from the apical four chamber view (normal ≤18 cm2) (See 'Right atrial size' above.)•RA pressure from the inferior vena cava (IVC) size and collapse (3, 8, 15 mmHg) (See 'RA pressure' above.)•sPAP from the tricuspid regurgitation (TR) velocity and estimated RA pressure (See 'Pulmonary artery pressure' above.)•RV systolic function using at least one quantitative parameter: tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) (normal ≥1.6 cm), tricuspid annular velocity (S’) (normal ≥10 cm/s), fractional area change (FAC) (normal ≥35 percent), myocardial performance index (MPI) (normal ≤0.4 by pulsed Doppler or ≤0.55 by tissue Doppler). (See 'Right ventricular function' above.)ACKNOWLEDGMENT — The UpToDate editorial staff would like to thank Drs. Nelson B. Schiller, Bryan Ristow, Xiushui Ren, and Warren Manning for their contributions as authors to previous versions of this topic review. 
		
