
			INTRODUCTION — The prognosis of patients with coronary artery disease is related to the extent of myocardium at risk. Proximal left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) lesions often supply a high percentage of the left ventricular myocardium, compared to proximal lesions in the circumflex or right coronary arteries. A study reported that the prevalence of significant proximal LAD disease in stable patients undergoing diagnostic coronary catheterization was 7.2 percent in New York State and 13.4 percent in Ontario, Canada [1].This topic will discuss both the choice between medical therapy and revascularization for treatment of proximal LAD disease in stable patients as well as the choice between coronary artery bypass graft surgery and percutaneous coronary intervention in those patients in whom revascularization is chosen. This discussion will focus on the outcomes of survival, myocardial infarction, and revascularization rates. Revascularization to improve angina refractory to medical therapy in patients for whom survival will not be improved is discussed separately. (See "Stable ischemic heart disease: Indications for revascularization" and "Stable ischemic heart disease: Overview of care".)The management of patients with stable, nonproximal LAD disease is similar to disease identified in the circumflex and right coronary arteries. (See "Stable ischemic heart disease: Indications for revascularization" and "Bypass surgery versus percutaneous intervention in the management of stable angina pectoris: Recommendations".)The discussion of coronary artery revascularization in the large subgroup of patients with diabetes is found elsewhere. (See "Coronary artery revascularization in patients with diabetes mellitus and multivessel coronary artery disease".) DEFINITION OF SIGNIFICANT — For the purposes of this topic, significant disease of the proximal (proximal to and including the first major septal branch) left anterior descending coronary artery is present when coronary angiography reveals one or more obstructive lesions and one of the following criteria:●Angina pectoris that is reasonably attributed to the lesion(s). Usually, the visual estimate of the severity of the stenosis is 70 percent or greater luminal narrowing.●A stress test, with or without imaging, showing evidence of moderate to severe myocardial ischemia consistent with a proximal left anterior descending coronary artery lesion.●Physiologic evidence at the time of cardiac catheterization supporting the finding of a significant lesion, such as an abnormal (low) fractional flow reserve. (See "Clinical use of coronary artery pressure flow measurements", section on 'Introduction'.) GENERAL MANAGEMENT OF CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE — Most patients with coronary artery disease should have their risk of subsequent cardiovascular events assessed with stress testing and some should have evaluation of left ventricular systolic function. All patients require aggressive risk-factor reduction. (See "Stress testing to determine prognosis and management of patients with known or suspected coronary heart disease" and "Stable ischemic heart disease: Overview of care", section on 'Measurement of left ventricular systolic function' and "Secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease".) The management of angina is discussed separately. (See "Stable ischemic heart disease: Overview of care", section on 'Antianginal therapy'.)INDICATIONS FOR REVASCULARIZATION — For patients with significant proximal left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) disease who have angina refractory to medical therapy, revascularization should be considered to improve symptoms. In addition, revascularization should be preferred to medical therapy in many such patients who have certain high-risk predictors, such as a large amount of viable myocardium at risk, as determined by stress testing with or without noninvasive imaging [2,3] or significant underlying left ventricular dysfunction [4-6]. The indication for revascularization is less certain for patients with low-risk findings on noninvasive testing in patients who are receiving no or minimal anti-ischemic medical therapy [7]. (See "Stable ischemic heart disease: Indications for revascularization", section on 'Improvement in survival'.) There are no contemporary randomized trials specifically comparing revascularization to medical therapy in stable patients with isolated proximal LAD disease. Thus, recommendations are based on extrapolation from trials comparing medical therapy with revascularization in broader populations, such as those with multivessel disease and a large area of myocardium at risk or significant underlying left ventricular dysfunction [2-6]. In these populations, worse outcomes have been found with medical therapy. (See "Stable ischemic heart disease: Indications for revascularization", section on 'Improvement in survival'.) Two studies suggesting benefit from revascularization are as follows:●In a retrospective analysis of 1188 patients with one vessel, proximal LAD disease who were followed for a median of 5.7 years after initial treatment [8], coronary artery bypass graft surgery (CABG) using the left internal mammary artery was associated with a significant reduction in the composite end point of death, myocardial infarction, or the need for repeat procedures compared to medical therapy (hazard ratio 0.48, 95% CI 0.23-0.64), but no significant improvement in adjusted survival (hazard ratio 0.74, 95% CI 0.44-1.23) at more than one year. ●In a 1994 meta-analysis of trials comparing medical and surgical therapy in patients with stable coronary disease, 59 percent of randomized patients had significant disease of the proximal LAD [4]. Among patients with one or two vessel disease, including the proximal LAD, CABG was associated with a significant reduction in five-year mortality (9 versus 15 percent with medical therapy, odds ratio 0.58). In comparison, patients with one or two vessel disease without proximal LAD involvement did equally well with medical therapy.Another trial using contemporary medical therapy, COURAGE, included a small group of patients with isolated proximal LAD disease. In COURAGE, which excluded patients with severe angina, a markedly positive treadmill test (significant ST-segment depressions and/or a hypotensive blood pressure response during stage I of the Bruce protocol) and a left ventricular ejection fraction of less than 30 percent, there was no significant difference between aggressive medical therapy or aggressive medical therapy plus percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) with bare metal stenting. Because COURAGE excluded many patients with proximal LAD disease with a large area of myocardium at risk, we do not believe its conclusions apply. (See "Stable ischemic heart disease: Indications for revascularization", section on 'Improvement in survival'.)Patients with prior CABG — Based on our clinical experience, rather than evidence from randomized trials or observational studies, we and others suggest repeat revascularization in patients with prior CABG and new obstruction of the proximal LAD artery with extensive anterior ischemia [9,10]. In these patients, survival is likely to be better with revascularization. For patients without prior placement of a left internal thoracic artery, CABG is preferred to PCI. Patients with ischemia in other locations and those with a patent left internal mammary artery to the LAD artery are unlikely to experience a survival benefit from repeat revascularization, and the decision to revascularize should be made primarily on the basis of symptoms [11]. (See "Stable ischemic heart disease: Indications for revascularization", section on 'Relief of angina'.)  PCI VERSUS CABG — For those patients in whom revascularization is chosen, the choice between percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) and coronary artery bypass graft surgery (CABG) depends on clinical parameters as well as the patient’s preference for the potential burdens associated with each form of revascularization. We prefer PCI with stenting in many patients with less complex coronary artery disease and relatively well preserved left ventricular systolic function. CABG might be preferred to PCI in patients with complex, proximal left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) disease with other unfavorable lesions (eg, chronic total occlusion in another vessel). Other patient and angiographic characteristics also may affect the decision such as age, left ventricular dysfunction, and diabetes mellitus (in which the outcome may be better with CABG). (See "Coronary artery revascularization in patients with diabetes mellitus and multivessel coronary artery disease", section on 'PCI versus CABG'.)Initial studies compared CABG to percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) [12-21]. Long-term survival was similar but revascularization rates were higher with PTCA compared to CABG in the broad group of patients with multivessel disease. However, PTCA without stenting is now rarely performed. (See "Bypass surgery versus percutaneous intervention in the management of stable angina pectoris: Clinical studies".)PCI can usually be performed with a high chance of success and low risk of complications in proximal LAD disease. When faced with more complex lesions such as true ostial location, particularly with involvement of the distal left main coronary artery, adjacent circumflex ostial disease, or complex bifurcation lesions involving a large first diagonal branch, consideration of CABG should be made. Complex LAD-diagonal bifurcation lesions and ostial LAD lesions that are flush with the distal left main should only be attempted by highly experienced operators in institutions with cardiac surgical facilities. When PCI with stenting is performed, drug-eluting stents (DES) are preferred in most patients because of a marked reduction in the incidence of restenosis compared to bare metal stents, including patients with proximal LAD disease [22-24]. (See "Drug-eluting compared to bare metal intracoronary stents".)Patients with multivessel disease — We prefer CABG rather than PCI for many patients with a significant narrowing of the proximal LAD with multivessel disease who have a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction or a large area of myocardium at risk. Earlier stent versus CABG trials in patients with multivessel disease, including the proximal LAD, have shown similar long-term survival but higher rates of repeat target vessel revascularization with stents [25-30]. Few of these patients in these trials had a left ventricular ejection fraction <30 percent. (See "Bypass surgery versus percutaneous intervention in the management of stable angina pectoris: Clinical studies", section on 'Stenting versus CABG for multivessel disease' and "Use of intracoronary stents for specific coronary lesions", section on 'Left main and left anterior descending disease' and "Coronary angiography and revascularization for unstable angina or non-ST elevation acute myocardial infarction", section on 'PCI versus CABG'.)For example, the SYNTAX trial randomly assigned 1800 patients with three-vessel or left main coronary artery disease to either CABG or PCI with DES [31]. After 12 months of follow-up, the composite primary end point (death from any cause, stroke, MI, or repeat revascularization) was significantly higher in the PCI group (17.8 versus 12.4 percent), with the result driven primarily by more frequent revascularization with PCI (13.5 versus 5.9 percent). After five years, however, CABG was also associated with fewer myocardial infarctions (MIs) and the lower rate of the composite outcome of death, stroke, or MI. This trial is discussed in detail elsewhere. (See "Bypass surgery versus percutaneous intervention in the management of stable angina pectoris: Clinical studies", section on 'SYNTAX trial'.)Patients with lower SYNTAX scores had lower event rates than those with intermediate or high scores. Secondary analyses suggested that among patients with low SYNTAX scores, the clinical outcomes were comparable with PCI and CABG, whereas in patients with higher SYNTAX score, outcomes were better with CABG. The SYNTAX score predicts a higher long-term risk with proximal LAD disease than with either proximal circumflex or right coronary artery disease. (See "Bypass surgery versus percutaneous intervention in the management of stable angina pectoris: Recommendations", section on 'SYNTAX score and SYNTAX score II'.)However, the ability of these trials comparing PCI with CABG are somewhat limited in their ability to guide decision making in patients with proximal LAD disease, as they included relatively few patients with these lesions.Patients with single vessel disease — For most patients with significant single vessel, proximal LAD disease in whom revascularization has been recommended, we suggest PCI rather than CABG. This preference is based on the desire to avoid the potential complications of CABG (such as stroke) despite a higher rate of repeat revascularization with PCI [32-34]. We estimate that an isolated proximal stenosis of the LAD is found in about 2 to 4 percent of patients undergoing diagnostic angiography. As discussed above, this finding is sometimes, but not always, an absolute indication for revascularization, since clinical trials have not shown a survival benefit compared to medical therapy. (See 'Indications for revascularization' above.) Thus, the main indication for intervention in this setting is for symptoms due to failure of medical therapy. However, given the safety and low procedural morbidity associated with PCI and stenting, most cardiologists favor revascularization of the proximal LAD given the large area at risk.  A 2008 meta-analysis of nine randomized trials, including 1210 patients, found no 5- or 10-year survival difference between CABG and PCI for management of single vessel LAD disease, although rates of repeat revascularization were higher at five years with PCI (33.5 versus 7.3 percent) [33]. A second meta-analysis came to similar conclusions [35]. The studies evaluated in these meta-analyses used predominantly bare metal stents. Randomized trials using a lateral or anterolateral thoracotomy (MID CABG) in patients with isolated LAD stenosis have suggested that this surgical approach is associated with equivalent mortality but better symptom control and a lower rate of target vessel revascularization than PCI with bare metal stents [36-38].Two studies have compared PCI with drug-eluting stents (DES) to CABG:●A randomized trial comparing DES to minimally invasive direct coronary artery bypass surgery (MIDCAB) evaluated outcomes in 130 patients with isolated proximal LAD disease [39]. The primary clinical end point was freedom from death, MI, or the need for target vessel revascularization. At one year, PCI with DES was noninferior to MIDCAB, with an event rate of 7.7 percent in both groups. Patients who received PCI had a higher rate of revascularization (6.2 versus 0 percent), while those who received MIDCAB had a higher rate of MI (7.7 versus 1.5 percent), most of which was periprocedural. (See "Early cardiac complications of coronary artery bypass graft surgery", section on 'Perioperative MI'.)●Using New York (United States) state clinical registries, CABG was compared to DES in 715 matched pairs of patients with isolated proximal LAD disease [40]. There was no significant difference in the rates of three-year mortality (adjusted hazard rate [AHR] 1.14, 95% CI 0.70-1.85) or mortality, MI, and/or stroke (AHR 1.15, 95% CI 0.76-1.73). The rate of repeat revascularization was significantly lower for CABG (AHR 0.54, 95% CI 0.36-0.81).In the patient with severe single vessel disease involving only the proximal LAD, it is important for the patient to be made aware of the strengths and weakness of either approach. For patients with more complex lesions, such as ostial location, diffuse disease, or bifurcation lesions, the risks with PCI increase. (See "Bypass surgery versus percutaneous intervention in the management of stable angina pectoris: Recommendations", section on 'SYNTAX score and SYNTAX score II'.)RECOMMENDATIONS OF OTHERS — The following guidelines include recommendations for the management of patients with proximal left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) disease. Recommendations made in these guidelines do not differ significantly from those made in this topic review, except as noted:●2011 American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association/Society of Cardiovascular Angiography and Intervention guideline for percutaneous coronary intervention [41].●2011 American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association guideline for coronary artery bypass graft surgery [42]. ●2014 European Society of Cardiology/European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery guidelines on myocardial revascularization [43]. This document recommends revascularization to improve prognosis for significant proximal LAD disease, which is defined as any lesion with >50 percent stenosis and documented ischemia or fractional flow reserve ≤0.80 for angiographic diameter stenoses <90 percent. In addition, the document includes a recommendation for the use of a Heart Team approach to discuss the options of percutaneous coronary intervention or coronary artery bypass graft surgery (CABG), as well as a preference for CABG if multivessel disease is present and the SYNTAX score is >22 if the surgical risk is low. SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS●The general approach to patients with proximal left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) disease is similar to that of all patients with coronary heart disease. This should include appropriate secondary prevention strategies and risk stratification, as well as the use of revascularization in patients with angina refractory to medical therapy. (See 'General management of coronary artery disease' above and 'Indications for revascularization' above.)●For patients with a significant narrowing of the proximal LAD who have high-risk criteria (left ventricular ejection fraction [LVEF] <30 percent or evidence of a large area of potentially ischemic myocardium), regardless of anginal severity, we recommend revascularization rather than medical therapy (Grade 1B). (See 'Indications for revascularization' above.)For patients without these high-risk predictors, we suggest revascularization rather than medical therapy (Grade 2C). Our preference for revascularization increases as the LVEF falls or as the extent of myocardium at risk increases.●For patients with a significant narrowing of the proximal LAD with multivessel coronary artery disease who have a moderately reduced LVEF of 30 to 50 percent or a large area of myocardium at risk, we suggest coronary artery bypass graft surgery (CABG) rather than percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) (Grade 2B). For these patients with multivessel disease who have a LVEF <30 percent, we suggest CABG rather than PCI (Grade 2C). For patients without these high-risk predictors, PCI is a reasonable option. (See 'Patients with multivessel disease' above.) ●For patients with significant single vessel, proximal LAD disease in whom revascularization has been recommended, we suggest PCI rather than CABG (Grade 2B). However, for those patients who prefer to accept the higher early morbidity (including an increased risk of stroke) with CABG in exchange for a lower rate of subsequent revascularization, CABG is an appropriate strategy. (See 'Patients with single vessel disease' above.)●For patients in whom a decision has been made to perform revascularization, it should be kept in mind that not all proximal lesions carry the same prognosis or success rate with PCI. This information may influence decision making between PCI and CABG. (See 'PCI versus CABG' above.) 
		
