
			INTRODUCTION — The middle ear is a gas-filled space. It is separated from the outside world by the tympanic membrane laterally and the Eustachian tube anteromedially. Pressure within the middle ear has to match that of the outside world for the tympanic membrane to vibrate normally and for hearing to sound clear. During normal physiologic function, air in the middle ear is absorbed slowly by the lining mucous membranes and has to be continually replaced [1]. This happens normally when one swallows or yawns, opening the eustachian tube for a second and allowing air flow to occur. When the eustachian tube does not function adequately, pressure differences develop between the middle ear and the outside world. These pressure differences can distort the tympanic membrane and lead to discomfort, hearing loss, and injury, otherwise known as barotrauma.This topic will focus on the clinical manifestations, diagnosis, and treatment of barotrauma. Other issues related to eustachian tube dysfunction are discussed in detail elsewhere. (See "Eustachian tube dysfunction".)EUSTACHIAN TUBE FUNCTION — The eustachian tube extends from the middle ear to the nasopharynx and is made up of two parts [2]:●The posterior half leading from the ear is a bony tube lined with mucosa that does not change shape.●The anterior half is made of soft tissue that is mucosa lined; it is normally collapsed.The eustachian tube opens momentarily during swallowing or yawning due to actions of the levator veli palati and the tensor veli palati muscles. These muscles elevate and tense the palate and simultaneously open the eustachian tube. This ensures that the eustachian tube is only open when it is protected against reflux from the oral cavity by elevation of the soft palate to close off the nasopharynx. The eustachian tube also needs to be closed most of the time to prevent tympanic membrane motion with respiration (an annoying problem).Dysfunction of the eustachian tube can occur for a variety of reasons. Swelling of the mucosa in the nasopharynx or in the Eustachian tube may occur with infection (eg, upper respiratory infection or acute otitis media) or edema (allergic). This swelling can impede normal eustachian tube function and lead to difficulties in equalizing middle ear pressure, thereby predisposing to barotrauma. Increased tissue mass in the nasopharynx, enlarged adenoids, and nasopharyngeal tumors also may obstruct adequate middle ear ventilation. (See "Eustachian tube dysfunction", section on 'Pathophysiology'.)Positive pressure can be generated in the nose and nasopharynx (Valsalva maneuver) to try to overcome the eustachian tube barrier. When the pressure difference is great, air can be forced through the eustachian tube into the middle ear to equalize pressure. Concomitant infection in the nose or nasopharynx may spread to the middle ear with this maneuver.Build up of pressure inside the middle ear is rarely a problem for long (other than with diving); air can usually force its way out of the middle ear via the eustachian tube. Slower equilibration may occur with absorption of the gases by the middle ear mucosa.ETIOLOGY — There are several different causes of ear barotrauma. The most frequently encountered etiology is flying [3,4]. Commercial aircraft have pressurized cabins, with the pressure generally equal to that at 7000 to 10,000 feet, not sea level. Outside barometric pressure decreases as the plane ascends. Normally this change is gradual and is equilibrated by swallowing or absorption of air by the middle ear mucosa. The opposite has to occur on descent; air pressure has to increase in the middle ear to balance the increase in atmospheric pressure. When this does not occur, the tympanic membrane is forced medially and stretched. This can lead to bruising of or bleeding into the tympanic membrane, formation of fluid exudates in the middle ear, and occasionally to tympanic membrane rupture.A similar sequence occurs with diving [5-11]. The major difference is that the pressure changes encountered are usually greater, often several atmospheres of pressure change compared to the less than one atmosphere pressure change seen during flying. Large pressure differences between the middle ear and the surrounding water can lead to the same injuries as with flying. In addition, inner ear barotrauma may occur due to rupture of the round and oval membranes separating the middle and inner ear [12]. This can result in formation of a perilymphatic fistula, leading to loss of inner ear fluid with consequent hearing loss and vertigo. Although length, depth, and number of dives may be correlated with temporary changes in ear function, they are not associated with long-term problems [12,13]. Other causes of barotrauma include use of decompression chambers and hyperbaric oxygen chambers [14-16]. (See "Complications of SCUBA diving", section on 'Ear barotrauma'.)Dizziness from decompression sickness is thought to be due to the difference in circulation in the vestibular and auditory parts of the inner ear. The vestibular side has 30 percent more volume and gets four times less circulation than the cochlea. This slows any compensation to changes in gas partial pressures and makes it more susceptible to injury [17].Blast injuries have become a more prevalent cause of barotrauma with the increased incidence of war and terrorist attacks. Barotrauma results from the air pressure wave generated by an explosion. The rapid pressure change allows no time to equalize the pressure. Injuries include bruising of the eardrum, bleeding into the drum and middle ear, eardrum rupture, ossicular disruption, and inner ear injury resulting in dizziness and tinnitus [18-22]. Surgery is necessary for repair of the eardrum perforation in up to half of these barotrauma-induced perforations [18,19].Barotrauma theoretically could be induced by skydiving, because of the rapid descent, but symptoms do not seem to occur [23].CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS — The most frequent symptom of barotrauma is pressure in the ear [24,25]. As the pressure differential increases, the pressure sensation turns to pain due to the stretching of the tympanic membrane. Hearing loss occurs due to deformation of the tympanic membrane and the pressure differential hindering membrane mobility. With mild pressure differences the feeling is that of having the ear blocked. As the pressure difference increases, changes occur in the tympanic membrane and middle ear that lead to greater hearing loss. Bleeding into the tympanic membrane can occur, and a serous or occasionally hemorrhagic effusion may form in the middle ear. With pressure differences greater than one atmosphere, ossicular disruption can cause a persistent conductive hearing loss and, as mentioned above, rupture of the round or oval window membranes can lead to severe vertigo and sensorineural hearing loss secondary to loss of perilymph from the inner ear.Any of the above injuries also may cause tinnitus. This can be pulsating or constant. The pulsating tinnitus usually resolves with resolution of the edema and serous effusion. The constant tinnitus often resolves as the ear heals, but occasionally may be permanent.DIAGNOSIS — The diagnosis of barotrauma is based upon an accurate history and a confirmatory physical examination. Any problem occurring when there is a change in surrounding pressure raises the likelihood that barotrauma has occurred. If the physical examination confirms the injury, then the diagnosis is secure.TREATMENTPrevention — The best treatment for barotrauma is avoidance. Planning for the pressure changes and if necessary medicating to prevent them can many times avoid the problem [3]. Changing plans to avoid flying with a cold or canceling dives when the ears won't clear can avoid injury [12,18].Use of oral decongestants, antihistamines, and nasal decongestant sprays prior to flying or diving may reduce obstruction around the eustachian tube and allow for easier pressure equalization [26-28]. Pseudoephedrine taken 30 minutes prior to flight may reduce the incidence of barotrauma [27]. Oxymetazoline is somewhat less effective. Ongoing studies are evaluating whether inhaled surfactant prior to diving could reduce Eustachian tube dysfunction [29] and whether decompression in near zero-gravity environments might effectively reduce the incidence of barotrauma [30]. Swallowing to open the eustachian tube or using the Valsalva maneuver (positive pressure against a closed nasal airway) usually equilibrates pressure in the middle ear to the outside. Doing this frequently during the change in pressure can prevent large pressure differences from forming and prevent any tissue injury. Chewing gum or sucking on hard candies helps for adults, sucking on a bottle helps for infants.Ear plugs have been designed that slow down the pressure changes from flying. These plugs, which are available in drug stores and most airports, allow more time to equalize the pressure change; they do not eliminate the need to equilibrate the pressure changes. Their benefit, however, has not been clearly demonstrated [31]. Ear plugs cannot be used with diving since equilibration of air pressure in the external ear canal blocked by ear plugs cannot easily occur underwater.Ventilation tubes can be placed in the ear to eliminate the barrier between the middle ear and the outside world. Barotrauma cannot occur in the absence of this barrier. This is an effective preventive treatment for patients undergoing hyperbaric oxygen therapy for wound healing [32]. Ventilation tubes may also be considered for patients who have poor Eustachian tube function and who must fly frequently.Balloon dilatation of the eustachian tube is being evaluated for chronic eustachian tube dysfunction [33,34]. This is a procedure where a balloon is passed through the nose and into the eustachian tube. It is inflated to stretch the eustachian tube. If studies confirm the long-term benefit of such intervention, then it may be a good alternative to those who want to dive or fly but cannot do so easily because of chronic eustachian tube dysfunctionTreatment of injury — Most injuries due to barotrauma heal with time and patience, including edematous and/or hemorrhagic ear drums, and serous or hemorrhagic otitis. Tympanic membrane ruptures also typically heal spontaneously if normal eustachian tube function is restored and the perforation is not secondary to a blast injury [12,18,19]. Transient vestibular symptoms from repeated diving barotrauma clear over time, without long term disequilibrium [35].Medications are of variable utility. Decongestants and antihistamines probably produce little if any change in the speed of recovery from barotrauma. Antibiotics are often mistakenly given to treat this noninfectious injury. They are indicated only when the eardrum has been ruptured and the middle ear has been contaminated. Analgesics are effective for pain relief, as necessary. There is no evidence to support the use of glucocorticoids to expedite recovery.Emergency situations occur when the trauma opens up the inner ear and creates a perilymphatic fistula. Loss of fluid from the inner ear can lead to dizziness (vertigo) and sensorineural hearing loss. Immediate referral should be made to an otolaryngologists to manage the injury. Bedrest and possible surgery may limit the risk for permanent hearing loss and dizziness.Surgical treatment — Surgery (eg, tympanoplasty or patching of the round or oval window) may be necessary for serious injuries due to inner ear barotrauma such as ossicular disruption and perilymphatic fistula. Complete bed rest with head elevation to avoid increases in cerebrospinal fluid pressure is usually indicated to decrease the leakage of perilymph [7]. Sensorineural hearing loss from a perilymphatic fistula may be permanent despite early intervention. Dizziness usually resolves, but resolution may take weeks to months in severe cases.Myringotomy has been used as both prevention and treatment for barotrauma. The pressure differences that lead to barotrauma cannot occur with a hole in the tympanic membrane. If barotrauma has occurred, fluid can be drained to restore hearing. The difficulty with this approach has been that the myringotomy usually heals within a few days—inadequate time for most travel and inadequate time for most injuries to heal. A tube may be placed in the eardrum to keep the hole patent for a longer time. Ventilation tubes are not ideal for most cases of barotrauma (with the exception of patients undergoing hyperbaric treatment), since they stay in much longer than they are needed.Myringotomies with or without tubes are not appropriate for prevention of scuba diving injuries. They open the middle ear up to fluid and infection from water that can pass into the middle ear.INFORMATION FOR PATIENTS — UpToDate offers two types of patient education materials, “The Basics” and “Beyond the Basics.” The Basics patient education pieces are written in plain language, at the 5th to 6th grade reading level, and they answer the four or five key questions a patient might have about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who want a general overview and who prefer short, easy-to-read materials. Beyond the Basics patient education pieces are longer, more sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are written at the 10th to 12th grade reading level and are best for patients who want in-depth information and are comfortable with some medical jargon.Here are the patient education articles that are relevant to this topic. We encourage you to print or e-mail these topics to your patients. (You can also locate patient education articles on a variety of subjects by searching on “patient info” and the keyword(s) of interest.) ●Basics topics (see "Patient information: Eustachian tube problems (The Basics)")SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS●The most common cause of ear barotrauma is flying. Diving, decompression, hyperbaric oxygen chambers, and blast injuries are other etiologies. (See 'Etiology' above.)●Barotrauma can manifest as ear pressure, pain, hearing loss, and tinnitus. Bleeding into the tympanic membrane may occur and, rarely, rupture of the round or oval window membranes can cause vertigo and sensorineural hearing loss. (See 'Clinical manifestations' above.)●Oral decongestants, antihistamines, and nasal decongestant sprays used prior to flying or diving may reduce obstruction around the eustachian tube and facilitate pressure equalization. Swallowing or the Valsalva maneuver can equalize pressures and prevent tissue injury. Chewing gum or sucking on hard candies can help adults, and infants may be helped by nursing or sucking on a bottle. Special ear plugs may help equalize pressure for flying, but cannot be used for diving. (See 'Prevention' above.)●Most barotrauma injuries heal spontaneously. Antibiotics are not indicated. Analgesics should be used as needed but decongestants, antihistamines, and glucocorticoids have not been shown to be effective. (See 'Treatment of injury' above.)●Dizziness (vertigo) and sensorineural hearing loss may indicate a perilymphatic fistula and are indications for immediate referral to an otolaryngologist. (See 'Treatment of injury' above.)●Myringotomy has been used as both prevention and treatment for barotrauma related to flying. Ventilation tubes may be needed for someone undergoing hyperbaric oxygen therapy. Tympanoplasty or patching may be needed for serious injuries such as ossicular disruption or perilymphatic fistula. (See 'Surgical treatment' above.)
		
