
			INTRODUCTION — Injuries to the elbow, forearm, and wrist account for more than 25 percent of all sports-related injuries [1]. Acute injuries usually are related to falls, whereas chronic injuries occur with repetitive motion. Individuals who injure their elbows usually are throwers (eg, baseball and javelin), power grippers (eg, weight lifters, racquet athletes, gardeners, and carpenters), or those who use the elbow as a weightbearing joint (eg, gymnasts).The anatomy, skeletal maturity, clinical manifestations, and differential diagnosis of elbow complaints in young athletes are reviewed here.ANATOMY — The elbow is made up of three interrelated joints (the radiocapitellar [radiohumeral], ulnohumeral, and radioulnar) and their stabilizing ligaments (table 1 and figure 1A-B). The radiocapitellar joint is formed laterally by the articulation of the capitellum of the humerus with the radial head. The ulnohumeral joint is formed medially by the articulation of the humerus with the coronoid process, trochlear notch, and olecranon of the ulna. The radioulnar joint is formed by the articulation of the radial head with the radial notch of the ulna and is surrounded by the annular ligament.The medial and lateral epicondyle and olecranon process of the humerus are the bony landmarks that are easily palpated. The medial epicondyle is the origin of the wrist and finger flexors and pronators. The lateral epicondyle is the origin of the wrist and finger extensors. The olecranon process is the insertion of the elbow extensors (triceps). The olecranon bursa is the most superficial of the 12 bursae surrounding the elbow.The muscles of the elbow and forearm can be divided according to their major actions: flexion/extension and supination/pronation.●Flexion/extension of the elbow occurs at the ulnohumeral joint. Elbow flexion is controlled by the biceps brachii and brachialis muscles. The biceps brachii has insertions on the radial tuberosity and the forearm flexor fascia through the bicipital aponeurosis or lacertus fibrosis. The brachialis lies deep to the biceps and originates from the distal humerus and inserts on the coronoid process of the ulna. Elbow extension is primarily controlled by the triceps and some of the anconeus (figure 2). The normal arc of motion in children and adolescents ranges from -15 to 0 degrees in full extension to 150 degrees in flexion. At least 30 degrees of extension and 130 degrees of flexion are necessary for the activities of daily living.●Supination/pronation of the forearm, with the radius rotating over the stationary ulna, occurs at the radiohumeral and proximal radioulnar articulations. The pronator quadratus and the pronator teres pronate the wrist (figure 3). The pronator quadratus runs obliquely from the distal ulna to the more distal radius. The pronator teres originates from the medial epicondyle and the proximal ulna and inserts on the lateral midshaft of the radius. The supinators are much stronger than the pronators and include the supinator and the biceps brachii. The supinator originates on the proximal posterior ulna and inserts on the proximal radius. The biceps brachii has insertions on the radial tuberosity and the forearm flexor fascia through the bicipital aponeurosis or lacertus fibrosis. The normal range of motion is approximately 90 degrees for both supination and pronation. At least 50 degrees of pronation and supination are necessary for the activities of daily living.Sensation and voluntary movement of the elbow and wrist are under control of the median, radial, ulnar, and musculocutaneous nerves (table 2). The median nerve crosses the elbow in the antecubital fossa just medial to the biceps tendon and brachial artery and primarily innervates the wrist flexor/pronators, finger flexors, and thenar muscles (figure 3). The ulnar nerve crosses the elbow posteriorly and medially in the cubital tunnel of the humerus. The radial nerve crosses the elbow anterior to the lateral epicondyle and innervates the wrist extensors and supinators (figure 2). The musculocutaneous nerve crosses the elbow in the lateral antecubital fossa and innervates the elbow flexors.The brachial artery is the major artery that transverses the antecubital fossa; injury to the brachial artery will cause radiating pain, decreased skin temperature, decreased pulses, and pallor of the distal arm and may result in Volkmann's contracture.SKELETAL MATURITY — Skeletal maturity in children and adolescents is classified according to the appearance and fusion of the secondary ossification centers of the distal humerus and proximal radius and ulna (figure 4A-B). Childhood, in relation to bone age, ends with the appearance of all the secondary ossification centers; adolescence with the fusion of all secondary ossifications centers; and young adulthood with the completion of all bone growth.The appearance of these ossification centers proceeds in an orderly fashion, usually occurring approximately one year earlier in girls than in boys [2]. The mnemonic to remember the order of their appearance is CRITOE (table 3).The secondary ossification centers fuse to create the mature bony elbow. The lateral epicondyle, trochlear, and capitellar centers fuse first; this unit then fuses with the distal humerus; the last fusion occurs at the medial epicondyle. Similar to the appearance of the ossification centers, fusion proceeds in an orderly fashion and usually occurs earlier in girls than in boys (table 3).HISTORY — Information obtained in the history will help to narrow the differential diagnosis for athletes with elbow complaints. The crucial elements of the history may vary depending upon whether the complaints are acute or chronic. Acute complaints begin with a discrete event; chronic complaints have an insidious onset and a longer duration of symptoms. The clinician should also ask about neck complaints which may be caused by significant cervical injuries with pain radiating to the elbow. Past medical history, family history, and review of systems must be included to rule out other causes of joint pain and swelling (eg, arthritis or other rheumatologic disorder, gout, infection, hemoglobinopathy, bleeding disorder, or neoplasm).Mechanism of injury — Acute elbow injuries can be caused by contact trauma, valgus trauma with the hand planted, or a fall on an outstretched hand. Information that is important to know is whether the athlete felt a pop, crack, or snap sensation at the time of the injury; whether they had or continue to have locking, catching, shifting, or instability of the elbow; and whether they have any distal neurovascular complaints (eg, weakness, tingling, paresthesias, coolness).Chronic elbow injuries typically are caused by repetitive activity or start of a new activity. The frequency, intensity, duration, progression, and mechanics of the activity should be determined. This determination is particularly true for throwing because it causes medial traction and lateral compression of the elbow. In addition, the elbow is the weakest link in the kinetic chain, the connection of joints from the foot through the arm that is used to throw an object; biomechanical change especially in the shoulder and scapula caused by an injury can cause abnormal mechanics and stress that will result in secondary injury at the elbow.Additional questions — In addition to the above questions regarding joint mobility and stability, the following are important points about which to inquire:●Pain – The location, quality, radiation, and intensity of pain (eg, on a 10-point scale) as well as aggravating and alleviating factors.●Neurovascular complaints – The presence of weakness, tingling, paresthesias, or coolness.●Interventions – Any interventions the athlete has tried to improve the symptoms (eg, medications, application of heat or cold, activity modification, rehabilitation, or surgery) and whether they were successful.●Functional performance – Has the athlete experienced a change in functional performance? Throwers with medial epicondyle apophysitis, for example, may complain initially of loss of control (eg, the tendency of the ball to sail higher than the intended target), followed by loss of endurance, pain, and finally loss of velocity.●Mechanical sensations – Popping, locking, catching, or "loose bodies."●Recent illnesses – Athletes being treated with quinolone antibiotics have been noted to have an increased risk of tendinitis and tendon rupture. The athlete should also be asked about recent illness because arthritis is a well-recognized and relatively common accompaniment to infection by a number of viruses. (See "Fluoroquinolones", section on 'Tendinopathy and tendon rupture' and "Specific viruses that cause arthritis".)●Age – The age and bone maturity of the athlete affect the differential diagnosis (table 4).PHYSICAL EXAMINATION — Children and adolescents who have elbow complaints must undergo a thorough history and screening examination of the neck and shoulder in addition to the elbow. Neck and shoulder injuries can manifest with symptoms at the elbow.The key components of the physical examination of the elbow are described below.Observation — The physical examination of the elbow includes observation for ecchymosis, swelling, muscular atrophy, and breaks in the skin that may indicate an open fracture or entry point for infection. The following normal relationships should be noted:●The angle between the long axes of the humerus and the forearm (the carrying angle) varies between 5º and 20º and usually is greater in girls than in boys [3]. Alterations in this angle may indicate previous fractures.●The lateral and medial epicondyle and olecranon process form an isosceles triangle with the elbow in 90º flexion and a straight line with the elbow in full extension. This relationship is lost in posterior elbow dislocations. (See 'Posterior elbow dislocation' below.)●The radial head, tip of the olecranon, and the lateral epicondyle normally form an equilateral triangle with the elbow in 90 degrees flexion. Alterations in this relationship may indicate fracture of the radial head, olecranon, or the lateral epicondyle.Palpation — The examination of the elbow should include palpation of the following structures in each location:●Anterior elbow – Biceps muscle and distal tendon●Posterior elbow – Olecranon process, olecranon bursa, epiphyseal plate and olecranon fossa, triceps brachii●Medial elbow – Medial epicondyle, medial epicondyle apophysis and epiphyseal plate, ulnar collateral ligament●Lateral elbow – Lateral epicondyle, radial head (best felt with the elbow at 90 degrees and supinating and pronating the forearm), and capitellumNeurovascular examination — The neurovascular examination of the elbow and distal extremity should include:●Sensation and strength testing in the distribution of the median, radial, ulnar, and musculocutaneous nerves (table 2)●Deep tendon reflexes of the biceps (C5), brachioradialis (C6), and triceps (C7)●Palpation of the brachial, radial, and ulnar pulsesRange of motion — The range of motion and strength of the elbow and wrist should be examined (table 5A-B).Provocative testing — Several confirmatory tests may be warranted in patients with a suspected diagnosis based upon the findings of the history and physical examination. They include varus and valgus testing of the medial complex, moving valgus stress test, the pronator compression test, and the OK and Tinel signs (table 6).DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS — The differential diagnosis for elbow pain in the young athlete is organized according to the location of pain (table 7).Anterior elbow — Anterior elbow pain can be caused by:●Biceps tendinitis or rupture●Anterior capsule strain●Median nerve compression syndromes●Radiculopathy of C5-6●Occult fractureAnterior capsule strain — Anterior capsule strain occurs after a hyperextension injury from a fall, with repetitive extension motions (eg, the follow-through of a pitcher), or during a posterior subluxation injury with spontaneous relocation.Physical examination may show a fibrotic flexion contracture. The differential diagnosis must include anything that could restrict full extension, including:●Posterior olecranon impingement, especially in throwers. These athletes usually have posterior pain at the end of their range with full extension.●Loose body, especially in patients with osteoarthritis. Loose bodies may be palpable or visible on elbow radiographs (three views).●Distal biceps tendinitis and muscle spasm. These athletes have weakness in elbow flexion and altered accessory motion in the proximal radius.●Osteochondritis dissecans (osteonecrosis) may be apparent on plain radiographs or MRI.Treatment of anterior capsule strain entails protection from repeated injury and range of motion exercises to avoid contracture. Splinting in a dynamic, hinged or static, progressive brace can be used for six months before considering operative management for the joint stiffness.Median nerve compression syndromes — Median nerve compression syndromes present with palmar side proximal forearm pain, particularly with repeated pronation, and with numbness and/or weakness in the median nerve distribution.Compression and tension on the proximal median nerve occurs most frequently in either the pronator teres (common median nerve) or the proximal flexor digitorum superficialis (anterior interosseous branch of median nerve); the location of impingement is determined by the physical examination as described above. Children and adolescents with the anterior interosseous nerve (AION) syndrome initially have proximal forearm pain followed by weakness in the hand with no sensory deficits. On physical examination they have a weak "OK sign" and/or a lack of DIP flexion in OK sign (more of a pincer grasp than an OK sign) (picture 1).Other etiologies of median nerve symptoms include a C6 radiculopathy, carpal tunnel syndrome, occult fracture, interphalangeal joint pathology, and rupture of the flexor pollicis.The treatment for median nerve compression syndromes includes:●Relative rest (avoidance of pain-producing activities: elbow flexion, wrist pronation, and grip activation)●Medications (NSAIDs)●Immobilization for 7 to 10 days●Progressive stretching and strengthening of elbow flexors, wrist flexors and pronators, and grip exercises●Neurodiagnostic evaluation may be helpful in localizing the lesion and degree of nerve injury.If no interval improvement is seen in six to eight weeks, surgical decompression should be considered. However, AION have recovered spontaneously up to 12 months after onset of symptoms [4].Posterior elbow — Posterior elbow pain can be caused by (table 7):●Posterior elbow dislocation●Olecranon bursitis●Triceps tendinitis or rupture●Osteophytic degeneration of the tendon●Valgus extension overload/olecranon impingement syndrome●Radiculopathy of C7, T1-2●Olecranon apophysitis/stress fracturePosterior elbow dislocation — Posterior elbow dislocation is the most common dislocation in children younger than 10 years of age and the second most common in adults, after shoulder dislocation [5]. Posterior elbow dislocations account for approximately 5 percent of all elbow injuries in children; 64 percent have associated fractures [6]. The peak incidence occurs at 12 years of age.Posterior elbow dislocations usually occur after a fall or a twisting injury to the elbow. Pain and obvious deformity aid in the diagnosis. The olecranon is prominent posteriorly, and the normal triangular relationship between the olecranon and the medial and lateral epicondyles is disrupted. Radiographs should be obtained to rule out associated fracture.Neurovascular complications are relatively uncommon, but they are imperative to diagnose [7]. Transient ulnar neuropathy, with the classic findings of altered sensation involving the ring and little fingers and hypothenar eminence, occurs in approximately 10 percent of cases. Median nerve injury occurs less frequently and is characterized by severe pain that is not relieved by elbow relocation. Brachial artery injuries, a rare complication of posterior elbow dislocation, cause radiating pain, decreased skin temperature, decreased pulse, and pallor in the distal arm. Early microvascular repair of brachial artery injuries decreases the long-term sequelae, including the development of contracture of the flexor muscles and median and ulnar nerve palsies (Volkmann's ischemic contracture) [8,9].Unreduced dislocations should be immobilized "as is" pending evaluation by an experienced practitioner [10]. Posterior elbow dislocations typically are reduced by an experienced practitioner. Multiple techniques are effective in the reduction of the uncomplicated posterior dislocation. The common components include:●Supination of the forearm●Elbow flexed to 90 degrees●Counter for status stabilizes the humerus●Gentle axial traction on the forearmIf not successful, adding more elbow flexion, volar directed pressure on the olecranon process as well as gentle pressure on the proximal forearm in a volar direction may be helpful [11]. Splint immobilization may be needed for 7 to 10 days, with early range of motion exercises. The arm then should be placed in a sling for two to three weeks. Gentle elbow flexion and extension exercises can begin at three to five weeks. Long-term functional outcomes are very good [12].Olecranon bursitis — Olecranon bursitis may be seen in repetitive throwers (eg, darts) or in children and adolescents who have direct contact trauma or friction to the olecranon (eg, a fall on a hard surface, wrestling). A boggy swelling over the olecranon that can be as large as an egg will be present on physical examination. Other diagnostic considerations include septic bursitis/arthritis, gout, and triceps tendinitis.Treatment for olecranon bursitis includes:●Protection and compression with an elbow pad●Application of ice as long as the elbow is swollen●NSAIDs as long as the elbow is painful●Diagnostic or therapeutic aspiration if indicated●Antibiotic therapy if infection is suspected (penicillinase resistant penicillin)●Bursectomy for chronic recalcitrant casesTriceps tendinitis or rupture (snapping tendonitis) — Whereas triceps tendinitis is relatively common, rupture is rare in children and adolescents unless associated with systemic lupus erythematosus, hyperparathyroidism, or xanthomatous degeneration or the athlete is receiving systemic or local corticosteroids, anabolic steroids, or quinolone antibiotics [13]. (See "Fluoroquinolones", section on 'Tendinopathy and tendon rupture' and "Use of androgens and other hormones by athletes", section on 'Other'.)The athlete may complain of a snapping sensation along the medial border of the elbow where the triceps snaps over the medial epicondyle at a greater than 135 degrees of flexion [14]. Similar complaints also may occur in athletes who have a subluxating ulnar nerve, but it usually occurs at 90 degrees of flexion. Physical examination may show swelling and pain to palpation over the distal triceps and posterior olecranon, pain with resisted extension, and decreased range of motion in elbow extension. Athletes who have triceps rupture may have a palpable defect, usually at the tendon's insertion on the olecranon, and decreased strength in extension of the elbow. Olecranon impingement and osteophytic degeneration of the tendon may have similar findings.Tendinitis can be treated with proper mechanics, relative rest, ice, NSAIDs, and a stretching and strengthening program. Corticosteroid injections should be avoided [15]. Complete rupture requires surgical repair, whereas partial tears require splint immobilization for four weeks with 30 degrees of elbow flexion [16]. Valgus extension overload/olecranon impingement syndrome (VEO/OIS) — VEO/OIS results from forceful repeated hyperextension, such as boxer's jabs or throwers with poor follow-through. Repetitive valgus stress at the elbow can stretch the ulnar collateral ligament, leading to medial elbow instability. Repetitive valgus extension loads, in the presence of medial instability, cause the medial olecranon to rotate internally and rub against the medial olecranon fossa and/or stretch the ulnar nerve.Olecranon impingement, which can occur without medial instability, may result in osteophyte formation, loose bodies, and fracture. Insidious onset of posterior medial elbow pain with locking and catching sensation in the elbow is the hallmark complaint [17], but is important to rule out osteochondritis dissecans of the capitellum.On physical examination the athlete with VEO/OIS has pain to palpation along the medial border of the olecranon fossa, pain with valgus of the elbow in extension, and possible flexion contracture. Their symptoms are worsened by passive hyperextension of the elbow. Children and adolescents who have triceps tendinitis may have similar symptoms, but their pain to palpation is posterior rather than medial and they do not have pain with passive hyperextension of the elbow.Radiographs may be helpful in athletes with long-standing symptoms or to rule out other diagnoses such as olecranon or medial epicondyle stress fracture.Treatment of VEO/OIS includes initial conservative management with no throwing for three to six months and rehabilitation to strengthen the medial elbow to provide dynamic support to elbow valgus with balanced dynamic firing patterns of the biceps and triceps. Surgery may be necessary to treat the underlying medial instability or for treatment of osteophyte and chondromalacia.Medial elbow — Medial elbow pain can be caused by (table 7):●Medial epicondylitis (golfer's elbow)●Ulnar neuritis●Medial epicondyle avulsion fracture●Medial epicondyle traction apophysitis●Ulnar collateral ligament tear●Radiculopathy of C8, T1Medial epicondylitis — Medial epicondylitis, also known as golfer's elbow, results from improper overuse of the forearm pronators and wrist flexors. This occurs primarily in tennis players who have a twist American serve and golfers whose trail arm lacks elbow extension at ball impact [18]. It is much less common than is lateral epicondylitis.Throwers are particularly susceptible to this injury because the flexor-pronator muscles are maximally involved during the acceleration phase of the throwing motion. Each pitch has the potential to generate more tensile force than the ulnar collateral ligament can tolerate [19]. This emphasizes the importance of muscular dynamic stabilizers in the throwing motion. Athletes with medial epicondylitis complain of aching pain around the medial epicondyle while performing certain movements; the intensity of the pain increases with the chronicity of symptoms.Physical examination demonstrates pain to palpation over the medial epicondyle and pain with resisted wrist flexion (picture 2) and pronation. Considering ulnar neuritis and medial instability as sources of the pain is important.The treatment of medial epicondylitis includes technical modification of the activity, relative rest, stretching and strengthening of flexor forearm groups, and the use of other modalities (NSAIDs, ice, and physical therapy) to decrease irritation.Ulnar neuritis — Ulnar neuritis is the most common nerve injury involving the elbow. It has numerous etiologies, including:●Direct trauma (from a fall or leaning on the elbows)●Repetitive traction (eg, the acceleration phase of throwing)●Exaggerated valgus from medial instability of the elbow [20]●Prolonged elbow hyperflexion (eg, talking on the phone)●Compression from muscle hypertrophy (eg, triceps, anconeus muscles in throwers and weight lifters)●Friction from ulnar nerve subluxation (16 percent of the general population have this hypermobility of the ulnar nerve)●Upper limb neural tension from abnormal muscle spasm and altered by mechanics [21] Pain at the posterior medial elbow that radiates proximally to the medial bicep-triceps interval and distally to the palm and dorsum of the hand and the fifth and ulnar fourth finger are the hallmarks of ulnar nerve irritation. The pain is reproduced with the Tinel maneuver (picture 3) and prolonged (three minutes) elbow flexion and wrist extension.Valgus instability at 30 degrees of flexion is an important test, particularly in throwers. Foraminal loading to stress the C8 nerve root will help to exclude cervical pathology. This test is performed by pushing down on the top of the head with gentle force.Radiographs may show medial osteophytic change. Electromyography and nerve conduction velocity studies correlate with the severity of the disease and may be positive in 40 to 50 percent of cases [22].The initial management is similar to that of an ulnar collateral ligament strain (see below) if medial instability is present. The components of treatment for ulnar neuritis without medial instability include avoidance of exacerbating activities, use of elbow pads to decrease incidental trauma, and use of elbow splints to keep arms fully extended during sleep.Antiinflammatory agents and physical therapy may be helpful. Recalcitrant cases (lasting three to six months) or those with motor deficits may need surgery to free the ulnar nerve. Numerous techniques, including anterior transposition, medical epicondylectomy, and/or in situ decompression, can be used [23].Little league elbow — Little league elbow is the name used to describe a group of elbow problems related to the stress of throwing in young athletes. Throwing can cause medial symptoms as well as lateral and posterior symptoms. The medial symptoms are related to the repetitive valgus distraction forces on the medial elbow. Microtrauma from overuse or improper throwing mechanics (opening up too soon so the throwing arm trails behind the trunk rotation) can cause injury. The skeletal maturity of the athlete affects the type of injury (table 4) [24].Risk factors for injury requiring surgery on their elbow or shoulder were discerned by comparing the throwing habits of injured and uninjured young pitchers (mean age 18 years) and included [25]:●Throwing frequently when arm was fatigued (OR = 36, 95% CI 6.0-221.0) ●Throwing more than 80 pitches per appearance (OR = 4.0, 95% CI 1.4-11.0) ●Pitching for more than eight months per year(OR = 5.0, 95% CI 1.4-18.3)●Fast ball faster than 85 mph(OR = 3, 95% CI 0.9-7.0) In a 10 year prospective study of young pitchers (age 9 to 14), 5 percent required elbow/shoulder surgery or had injuries that for them to stop playing baseball. Only 2.2 percent were still pitching at the end of the study [26].The total number of pitches thrown by children in youth baseball (eg, Little League) may be more important than the type of pitch thrown (eg, curveball versus fastball) in predicting elbow injury, given that biomechanical forces required to throw a curveball are actually less than for a fastball [27,28]. However, increased frequencies of elbow and shoulder pain have been described in children who throw breaking pitches (curveballs or sliders) [29]. The Committee on Sports Medicine and Fitness of the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and Little League Baseball recommend that preventive measures should be employed to prevent these injuries in young pitchers [30,31]. These measures include restriction of the amount of pitching (eg, limit pitches per game, months per year spent pitching); instruction in proper throwing techniques; avoidance of pitching when the arm hurts or is fatigued; and education of coaches, parents, and children to facilitate early diagnosis and treatment.Medial epicondyle apophysitis — The medial epicondyle has the longest exposure to medial distraction forces in the elbow because it is the last ossification center to close. Thus, medial epicondyle apophysitis is the most common elbow injury during childhood (before the appearance of all the secondary ossification centers).Athletes with medial epicondyle apophysitis complain of medial elbow pain, initially after throwing, that progresses to persistent pain.Physical examination demonstrates pain to palpation of the medial epicondyle that is exacerbated by resisted wrist flexion (picture 2) and valgus testing of the elbow. Elbow extension may be limited. Radiographs demonstrate an open ossification center without separation.Treatment includes no throwing for four to six weeks, as well as symptomatic treatment with ice and NSAIDs. Correction of throwing mechanics and a progressive throwing program over the subsequent six to eight weeks will help the athlete to return to play. In addition, a position change from pitcher (typically 15 to 30 throws per inning) may help the player to avoid overloading the elbow.Medial epicondyle avulsion fractures — Medial epicondyle avulsion fractures are the most common elbow injury during adolescence (between the appearance and the fusion of the secondary ossification centers). Athletes may report that they felt a sudden "pop" of the elbow during the throw, followed by acute onset of pain [32]. The physical findings in athletes with medial epicondyle avulsion are similar to those in apophysitis. However, radiographs demonstrate a separation of the medial epicondyle apophysis.Treatment of minimally displaced (<2 mm) medial epicondyle avulsion fractures involves splint immobilization for six weeks. Early range of motion exercises out of the splint can be started once the athlete can perform them without pain (usually one to two weeks). Referral for surgical intervention is advised if greater than 2 mm displacement of the apophysis has occurred or if concomitant ulnar nerve findings are present.Ulnar collateral ligament tears — Ulnar collateral ligament tears occur in the skeletally mature thrower, as well as in wrestlers, gymnasts, or football players who sustain traumatic valgus injury from a fall on an outstretched arm or a tackle while the hand is planted. The anterior bundle of the ulnar collateral ligament is the primary restraint to valgus forces at the elbow during the throwing motion [33]. Of throwers with a ruptured ulnar collateral ligament, 50 percent had a single catastrophic event; most had some symptoms before the event [34].On physical examination, valgus stress at 30 degrees of elbow flexion reproduces medial pain and instability [35]. Ulnar collateral ligament tears may be seen on stress radiographs with the application of valgus force. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with contrast arthrography is sensitive for both partial and full thickness ligament injuries [36]. The “moving valgus stress test” can increase the sensitivity of the physical exam for detecting UCL injuries [35]. Treatment includes conservative management for at least six months with no throwing activities. Ice and NSAIDs can be used to control symptoms; the ulnar nerve, which runs behind the medial epicondyle, should be avoided during the application of ice because it can sustain thermal injury from prolonged exposure. The associated strength deficits should be addressed through rehabilitation. An eight-week progressive throwing program after the six-month rest will test the success of conservative management. If symptoms return, surgical intervention may be necessary (ulnar collateral ligament reconstruction, also known as Tommy John surgery).Lateral elbow — Causes of lateral elbow pain include (table 7):●Lateral epicondylitis●Radial nerve syndromes●Panner's disease●Osteochondritis dissecans of the capitellum●Musculocutaneous nerve entrapment●Radiculopathy of C5, 6Lateral epicondylitis — Lateral epicondylitis accounts for 7 percent of all sports injuries and is the most common sports-related problem at the elbow. It affects 40 to 50 percent of recreational tennis players during their career and occurs equally in males and females. Predisposing factors include high tension on the racket strings, improper-sized grip, and leading the backhand with the elbow.Lateral epicondylitis also is seen in computer users from repetitive wrist extension for keyboard use. Repetitive wrist extension causes degenerative inflammation of the wrist extensors that insert on the lateral epicondyle, most commonly the extensor carpi radialis brevis. The degenerative nature of the problem is supported by the increased prevalence of lateral epicondylitis with increased age.Patients complain of sharp pain at the lateral epicondyle that may radiate down the extensor forearm. They also may complain of wrist weakness. Pain to palpation over the lateral epicondyle that worsens with resisted wrist extension (picture 4) or passive wrist flexion with the elbow extended is demonstrated on physical examination.Initial treatment includes ice, NSAIDs, use of a counterforce brace, rehabilitation to stretch and strengthen the wrist extensors and grip muscles, and curtailing exacerbating activities. Exacerbating activities include hand shaking, opening jars and doors, and carrying objects with the wrist extended (as with the plastic bags from the grocery store). Wrist splint immobilization and corticosteroid injection may be helpful if the above measures are not effective. Persistent pain despite aggressive treatment may indicate a concomitant posterior interosseous nerve injury. Surgical decompression should be considered if conservative management fails or the residual symptoms are not acceptable after one year.Radial nerve syndromes — As the radial nerve enters the antecubital fossa laterally, it divides into the posterior interosseous branch and the superficial radial nerve.●Posterior interosseous nerve syndromes occur from irritation of the nerve typically caused by repetitive pronation and supination, direct trauma, or mass lesion from tumor or previous injury. Posterior interosseous nerve syndromes coexist in 5 percent of lateral epicondylitis cases and may explain lack of response to conservative measures in these patients [37]. (See 'Lateral epicondylitis' above.)Physical examination demonstrates lateral elbow pain, usually distal to the lateral epicondyle, and weakness in the wrist, thumb, and finger extensors. These findings also may be present in patients who have diabetes, polyarteritis nodosa, and heavy metal poisoning. NSAIDS and avoidance of irritating movements can help control symptoms, but posterior interosseous nerve syndromes may require surgical decompression for definitive treatment.●Radial tunnel syndrome occurs because of compression of the superficial radial nerve by structures in or near the radial tunnel, including the supinator, extensor carpi radialis brevis, and brachioradialis. It may be caused by repetitive pronation and supination, direct trauma, ganglion, or bony lesion of the radial head. Complaints include deep, dull ache distal to the lateral epicondyle that may be worse at night. Weakness and sensory changes are uncommon. Physical examination demonstrates pain to palpation over the extensor mass about four finger breadths distal to lateral epicondyle and pain with resisted forearm supination. Pain may be reproduced by resisted extension of the middle finger with the elbow in extension (long finger extension test) (picture 5) [38].Radiocapitellar joint injuries — Radiocapitellar joint injuries are common in throwers because of the compression associated with the acceleration phase of throwing and in gymnasts because the elbow is made to be a weightbearing joint [39,40].●Panner disease – Panner disease is an osteochondrosis of the capitellum. Osteochondrosis is a degenerative disorder of the growing epiphysis and its secondary ossification centers. It occurs most frequently in boys between 7 and 12 years of age and is almost always unilateral and in the dominant (ie, throwing) arm. The symptoms include sudden onset of lateral elbow tenderness with decreased range of motion in extension. Appreciable swelling may occur. Radiographs will show fragmentation (areas of sclerosis and rarefaction) of the capitellum with an irregular joint surface. The mainstay of treatment is avoidance of elbow stress until radiographic and physical examination provides evidence of full healing (usually 6 to 12 weeks). Because of the young athlete's ability to regenerate and recalcify, the capitellum has excellent potential for normal anatomic and functional healing [41,42].●Osteochondritis dissecans – Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) is an avascular necrosis of the articular cartilage and underlying subchondral bone that occurs in the capitellum in older athletes (age 13 to 15 years), particularly gymnasts, baseball pitchers, and American football quarterbacks. The symptoms include dull, poorly localized lateral elbow pain with decreased range of motion. Mechanical symptoms of popping, locking, and catching usually are late symptoms. Plain radiographs show flattening of the capitellum with a crater and subchondral sclerosis (image 1), but may be normal initially. Magnetic resonance imaging is helpful in early detection and staging of the lesion. The diagnosis and treatment of OCD of the elbow is discussed in greater detail separately. (See "Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD): Clinical manifestations and diagnosis", section on 'Clinical manifestations' and "Management of osteochondritis dissecans (OCD)".) Musculocutaneous nerve entrapment — Musculocutaneous nerve entrapment can present with vague pain and dysesthesia in the anterior lateral portion of the elbow and forearm. It has been reported in swimmers, racquet players, weight lifters, and throwers who repeatedly pronate the elbow in full extension [43]. Conservative management, with avoidance of elbow flexion and pronation, may relieve symptoms, but surgical decompression of the biceps and brachialis fascia may be necessary.DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING — Plain radiographs and MRI may be necessary to evaluate the bones and soft tissues of the elbow of the athlete with elbow pain. Plain radiographs should be obtained in three views: anterior-posterior, lateral, and lateral oblique. The anterior-posterior view shows the epicondyles (medial and lateral) and the articular surfaces (radiocapitellar and ulnotrochlear). The lateral shows the relationship between the bones of the distal humerus and proximal forearm. The lateral oblique shows the radiocapitellar joint, medial epicondyle, radioulnar joint, and coronoid process. Comparison views do not increase diagnostic accuracy, but they may be helpful for patients who have inconclusive initial radiographic and clinical evaluation [4].Numerous anatomic relationships should be evaluated on lateral elbow radiographs to avoid misdiagnosing subtle fractures:●The line along the anterior humerus should intersect the middle one-third of the capitellum (anterior humeral line).●The line of the long axis of the radius should extend through the middle of the capitellum (radiocapitellar line).●The line drawn along the top of the coronoid process should barely cross the top of the capitellum and trochlea (coronoid line).●The fat pad of the elbow usually sits along the anterior border of the coronoid fossa and is concave-shaped. The fat pad is displaced superiorly and ventrally and appears convex if a fracture (sail sign) is present.MRI is an excellent tool in the evaluation of the soft tissue structures damaged in chronic overuse injuries. Muscles, tendons, ligaments, nerves, and articular cartilage as well as more subtle bone injuries such as occult fracture and osteochondritis dissecans are well-imaged using MRI. MRI with intra-articular contrast may be particularly useful in identifying partial and full-thickness tearing of the ulnar collateral ligament. MRI imaging of uninjured experienced high school pitchers demonstrated asymmetric thickening of the UCL (65 percent) and posteromedial subchondral sclerosis in the ulnotrochlear articulation (61 percent). This may represent morphologic changes from throwing or may demonstrate early degenerative changes in these young athletes. Clinical correlation is important when using imaging to make treatment decisions [44]. SUMMARY●The elbow is made up of three interrelated joints (the radiocapitellar [radiohumeral], ulnohumeral, and radioulnar) and their stabilizing ligaments (table 1 and figure 1A-B). (See 'Anatomy' above.)●Acute elbow injuries can be caused by contact trauma, valgus trauma with the hand planted, a fall on an outstretched hand, or spontaneously. (See 'Mechanism of injury' above.)●Chronic elbow injuries typically are caused by repetitive activity (eg, throwing a baseball). (See 'Mechanism of injury' above.)●A careful history and physical examination help to narrow the possible causes of an elbow injury. (See 'History' above and 'Physical examination' above.)●The differential diagnosis for elbow pain in the young athlete is organized according to the location of pain (table 7). (See 'Differential diagnosis' above.)●Plain radiographs and MRI are useful adjuncts to the history and physical examination in athletes with elbow pain. (See 'Diagnostic imaging' above.)●Treatment of insidious onset elbow pain is based on treating the underling etiology of overuse.
		
