
			INTRODUCTION — Developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH) describes a spectrum of conditions related to the development of the hip in infants and young children. It encompasses abnormal development of the acetabulum and proximal femur and mechanical instability of the hip joint (table 1).Newborns often have physiologic laxity of the hip and immaturity of the acetabulum during the first few weeks of life. In most cases, the laxity resolves, and the acetabulum proceeds to develop normally. With assessment of risk factors, serial physical examination of the hips, and appropriate use of imaging studies, most children with pathologic hips can be correctly diagnosed and treated without long-term sequelae. (See "Developmental dysplasia of the hip: Treatment and outcome".)Typical DDH, which generally occurs in otherwise healthy infants, will be the focus of this topic review. Hip dysplasia and instability also occur in association with other conditions. Teratologic hip dysplasia occurs in association with various syndromes (eg, Ehlers Danlos, Down syndrome, arthrogryposis), and neuromuscular hip dysplasia occurs when there is weakness and/or spasticity in some or all of the hip muscle groups (eg, in spina bifida or cerebral palsy). The diagnosis and management of teratologic and neuromuscular hip dysplasia differ from the diagnosis and management of hip dysplasia in otherwise healthy infants.The clinical features and diagnosis of DDH in otherwise healthy children will be reviewed here. The epidemiology, pathogenesis, treatment, and outcome are discussed separately. (See "Developmental dysplasia of the hip: Epidemiology and pathogenesis" and "Developmental dysplasia of the hip: Treatment and outcome".)CLINICAL FEATURES — The clinical features of developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH) depend upon the age of the child and the severity of the abnormality (table 2). The spectrum of presentation ranges from instability on the newborn examination to subtle limited abduction in the infant, to asymmetric gait in the toddler, to activity-related pain in the adolescent, to osteoarthritis in the adult. The earlier DDH is detected, the simpler and more effective the treatment and the better the long-term outcome [1,2]. (See "Developmental dysplasia of the hip: Treatment and outcome".)History — Thorough review of the child’s medical and family history helps to identify risk factors for DDH and exclude other congenital or neuromuscular causes of hip instability. The most important hip-specific risk factors are breech positioning at ≥34 weeks gestation (whether or not external cephalic version is successful) [3], family history of DDH, and female sex. Other factors to be considered include birth order (the risk is increased in first born infants), pregnancy history (eg, the risk is increased in oligohydramnios), and other musculoskeletal abnormalities related to tight intrauterine packaging (eg, torticollis and metatarsus adductus). (See "Developmental dysplasia of the hip: Epidemiology and pathogenesis", section on 'Risk factors'.) Infants and young children with untreated hip dislocation rarely have pain or other limitations. Most affected children begin to walk and reach other developmental milestones at the appropriate time.ExaminationSchedule and overview — We suggest that newborns be examined for DDH in the first few days of life and at every health supervision visit until the child is walking normally (usually by two years of age). This is the schedule of hip examinations recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics [2] The newborn examination and the examination at two weeks of age are particularly important for early detection of DDH. The pertinent examination findings of DDH vary according to age (table 2). The most important aspects of the examination are hip instability in the young infant and range of motion in the older infant and child. It is important to explain the hip examination to the parents as it is being performed and to document the results at each visit. (See 'Hip instability' below and 'Range of motion' below.)General examination — Important aspects of the general examination for DDH include the neurologic examination and examination of the spine and distal lower extremities, looking for abnormalities associated with DDH and other causes of hip instability.●The neurologic examination should include evaluation of spontaneous movement of all four extremities and assessment of spasticity. (See "Neurologic examination of the newborn" and "Detailed neurologic assessment of infants and children".)●The spine examination should include cervical range of motion (looking for torticollis (picture 1)), and cutaneous manifestations of spinal dysraphism (eg, dimples and hairy patches). (See "Pathophysiology and clinical manifestations of myelomeningocele (spina bifida)".)●Examination of the extremities should include examination of the feet for metatarsus adductus (picture 2). (See "Lower extremity positional deformations", section on 'Metatarsus adductus'.)Age-specific findings of DDH — The pertinent examination findings vary according to age (table 2):●In infants younger than three months it is most important to evaluate the stability of the hips using the Ortolani and Barlow maneuvers. The Galeazzi and Klisic signs also may be useful. Decreased abduction generally is not present at this age. (See 'Hip instability' below and 'Asymmetry' below and 'Klisic test' below.)●After three months of age, limited abduction, apparent thigh-length discrepancy (in unilateral cases), and the Galeazzi and Klisic tests are better indicators of DDH than is instability. By three months of age tests of instability are of little value because unstable hips have usually stabilized (the once-dislocatable hip stabilizes in the reduced position; the once-reducible hip stabilizes in the dislocated position). (See 'Range of motion' below and 'Asymmetry' below and 'Klisic test' below.)●In walking-aged children with unilateral DDH, weakness of the hip abductors on the affected side may be indicated by a positive Trendelenburg pelvic tilt test (inability to maintain the pelvis horizontally while standing on the ipsilateral leg) (figure 1) and the presence of a Trendelenburg lurch while walking. (See 'Asymmetry' below.)Hip instability — Physical examination techniques to detect hip instability use adduction and posterior pressure to feel for dislocatability and abduction and elevation to feel for reducibility (table 1) [4-6]. Each hip should be examined individually for instability. The infant should be on a stable surface in the supine position, with the hip flexed to 90º and in neutral rotation [2]. The examination should occur when the infant is calm and not crying. The hips are best examined with all clothing and diapers removed from the lower extremities.●Barlow maneuver – The thigh is grasped loosely with the examiner's index and middle finger along the greater trochanter and the thumb on the inner thigh. The hip is gently adducted and a posteriorly directed pressure applied. If the hip is dislocatable, posterior movement and a palpable clunk may be detected as the femoral head exits the acetabulum (the "jerk of exit") [4-6]. A subluxatable hip is characterized by a subtle sliding movement or a feeling of looseness, like a tennis ball moving in a soup bowl. A positive Barlow maneuver assumes a reduced hip that is subluxatable or dislocatable.●Ortolani maneuver – The hip is held in the same manner as for the Barlow maneuver. From an adducted position the hip is gently abducted while lifting the trochanter anteriorly. Extreme abduction should be avoided because it decreases the sensitivity of the Ortolani maneuver. If the hip is dislocated, the Ortolani maneuver may reduce it and is accompanied by a palpable clunk. A positive Ortolani maneuver assumes a dislocated hip that is reducible. The sensation of dislocation or reduction is distinct and best described as a "jerk" or "clunk". This sensation is different from that of the high pitch benign joint popping, clicking, or snapping caused by the snapping of tendons or ligaments in and around the hip and knee. The term "hip click" is misleading and is best avoided; hip clicks are not suggestive of DDH [7,8].The combination of the Barlow and Ortolani maneuvers has a high specificity (estimated to be approximately 98 to 99 percent) in the detection of hip instability [9]. The sensitivity varies depending upon the skill of the examiner, the number of examinations performed, and the diagnostic standard (eg, ultrasonography, plain radiographs). Sensitivity is increased in experienced hands (ranging from 87 to 97 percent) [10-13]. Asymmetry — Asymmetric examination findings may be helpful in unilateral DDH. However, approximately 20 percent of cases are bilateral [14]. Lack of asymmetry does not exclude DDH and may delay the diagnosis Apparent shortening of one femur is an important sign of unilateral dislocation and can be elicited with the Galeazzi test (also called the Allis or Perkins test). This is performed with the infant supine, hips flexed to 90º, knees flexed, and feet flat on a level surface and side by side, with the heels in apposition to the buttocks. In this position, the knees are normally at the same level. In unilateral dislocation, the head of the femur is displaced posteriorly, functionally shortening the thigh, and the ipsilateral knee will be lower than the other knee (figure 2). A positive Galeazzi test is not specific for DDH. Other causes of leg length discrepancy must be considered (eg, hemihypertrophy, femoral hypoplasia, coxa vara).Asymmetry in the position or number of the inguinal, thigh, or gluteal skin folds may be a clue to the diagnosis of DDH (figure 3 and figure 4). In the case of DDH, these increased folds are due to functional shortening of the femur with “bunching” of the skin and muscle around it. This finding is sensitive but not specific for DDH, since skin fold asymmetry is present in approximately 24 percent of all infants [15].In the child who is walking, gait asymmetry may provide a clue to unilateral DDH. The abnormal gait is usually caused by leg-length discrepancy, resulting in gait changes, such as toe-walking on the affected side or vaulting over the longer contralateral leg [16]. A child with unilateral hip dislocation will have a Trendelenburg lurch on the affected side (figure 1).Range of motion — In a child older than three months, limitation of abduction (<45º) is the most reliable sign of DDH. Normal range of motion in a supine infant with the pelvis stabilized is >75º for abduction and at least 30º past the midline for adduction [17]. In a review of 683 infants older than three months, unilateral limited hip abduction had a sensitivity of 69 percent and a specificity of 54 percent in the detection of ultrasonographically confirmed DDH [18]. In a child younger than three months, however, limitation of abduction may not be present because there has not been enough time to develop an adduction contracture. (See "Developmental dysplasia of the hip: Epidemiology and pathogenesis", section on 'Embryology and pathogenesis'.)Patients with unilateral DDH may have increased internal rotation of the hip because increased femoral anteversion is often associated with DDH [19]. Internal hip rotation is assessed with the patient lying prone on the examination table and the knees flexed; the lower leg is rotated away from the axis of the body (rotating the hip internally) (figure 5). (See "Approach to the child with in-toeing", section on 'Focused examination of the lower extremities'.)Klisic test — A positive Klisic test is suggestive of DDH. The Klisic test is performed by placing the index finger on the anterior-superior iliac spine and the middle finger on the greater trochanter. An imaginary line between these points passes through or above the umbilicus in a child without DDH (negative Klisic test). The line passes below the umbilicus if the hip is dislocated (positive Klisic test) because the greater trochanter is in a more superior position (figure 6). The Klisic test may be particularly helpful in bilateral dislocations when abduction is symmetrical and the Galeazzi sign is negative (ie, the knees are at the same height).Bilateral dislocation — Bilateral DDH occurs in approximately 20 percent of cases [14]. In infants younger than three months, the tests for instability (ie, the Ortolani and Barlow maneuvers) may be useful in detecting bilateral DDH. However, as DDH progresses, dislocated hips become irreducible and instability is no longer detected. Findings related to symmetry (eg, Galeazzi sign, thigh folds) are not helpful in bilateral dislocation [17]. (See "Developmental dysplasia of the hip: Epidemiology and pathogenesis", section on 'Embryology and pathogenesis'.)In children older than three months, the most important examination finding for bilateral dislocated hips is symmetric limited abduction (<45°). Other signs may include widening of the perineum, bilateral positive Klisic tests, and short thigh segments relative to the child's size (figure 7). Once the child begins to walk, hyperlordosis and a waddling Trendelenburg gait are classic findings (table 2 and figure 1). Dysplasia without dislocation — Dysplasia without dislocation usually has no clinical findings and is asymptomatic until adolescence or early adulthood. It is often found only through diligent screening of risk factors or incidentally when radiographs are obtained for other concerns (eg, an abdominal radiograph for evaluation of bowel obstruction, cystography (image 1) ) or for assessment of activity-related hip pain in an adolescent or young adult. Natural history — The natural history of untreated DDH depends upon the age of the patient and the severity of DDH [20-23]. Most hip instability in newborns stabilizes soon after birth, as physiologic laxity decreases and the femoral head and acetabulum grow. In observational studies, there is a high rate of resolution of neonatal hip instability without intervention [4,24-27]. In a cohort of 11,989 infants examined by a single examiner, 60 percent of hips that demonstrated instability on physical examination at birth stabilized in the first week of life, and nearly 90 percent stabilized by two months [4]. These hips were functionally and radiographically normal at 12 months of age. Similar results were reported in a study of routine ultrasonographic screening of more than 14,000 infants: 6 percent had abnormalities soon after birth, 90 percent of which became normal by nine weeks of age [27].Infants and young children with untreated hip dislocation rarely show signs of pain or other limitations. Most children reach developmental milestones at the appropriate time. A dislocated hip generally does not delay the age at which the child begins to walk. A dislocated hip may function well for many years [23]. However, weakness in the hip abductor musculature may result in the classic Trendelenburg gait pattern. Over time, there may be gradual progression of functional disability, pain, and accelerated degenerative hip disease. The risk of these complications is not well defined but may be associated with the development of a false acetabulum [28]. Patients with unilateral dislocations may have leg-length discrepancy, ipsilateral knee problems, scoliosis, and gait disturbance. Patients with bilateral dislocations may develop back pain (perhaps related to increased lumbar lordosis).Dysplasia in a reduced or subluxed hip may be diagnosed incidentally when radiographs are obtained for other reasons. The clinical course for patients with this presentation is variable. These hips are often asymptomatic in infants and young children and radiographic abnormalities may improve with time as the acetabulum still has excellent remodeling potential [28-31]. After school age, the likelihood of spontaneous improvement is low. Patients with persistent dysplasia without dislocation may remain asymptomatic for some time, but may develop activity-related hip pain or premature degenerative joint disease in adolescence or young adulthood. This occurs as a result of increased cartilage contact stress at the anterior and lateral margins of the acetabulum. Pain may start soon after skeletal maturity, or, in females, during the first or second pregnancy, or at menopause. Patients 40 to 60 years old who present with hip osteoarthritis are often found to have mild dysplasia as a contributing cause [20-23].DIAGNOSTIC IMAGINGUltrasonography — Ultrasonography is the primary imaging technique for assessing the morphology and stability of the infant hip. It is an important adjunct to the clinical evaluation until four to six months of age [32-34]. Ultrasonography can be helpful in confirming physical examination findings and evaluating high-risk infants with normal examination findings. The major drawback of ultrasonography is that accurate interpretation requires training and experience [35].Ultrasonographic criteria for developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH) have been established for static imaging (which includes coronal and transverse planes) and dynamic imaging of the flexed hip with and without a modified Barlow stress maneuver [34,36]. The combination of static and dynamic imaging permits evaluation of hip morphology, position, and stability.Static views include a coronal image with the infant in the lateral decubitus position and the hips flexed at 30 to 45º [37]. In this position, the ossified ilium is viewed as a straight white line above the femoral head and superior acetabulum (figure 8 and image 2). The alpha angle is measured from the lateral wall of the ilium and the bony roof line. The beta angle is the angle formed by the lateral wall of the ilium and the cartilaginous roof line. These angles are used to classify DDH according to the Graf system (figure 9) [37]. Another important parameter is the percentage of the femoral epiphysis that is covered by the acetabular roof. For infants younger than four months of age, we generally consider coverage of >50 percent to be normal. The dynamic technique uses axial and coronal images with real-time stress of the femoral head, similar to the instability test maneuvers [38]. In the first few days of life, 4 to 6 mm of laxity is considered normal. Dynamic imaging is usually omitted when the hips are examined during treatment [36].Plain radiographs — The value of plain radiographs in the evaluation of DDH depends upon the age of the patient and the degree of ossification. Plain radiographs have limited value in the detection of DDH during the first four to six months of life when the femoral head and acetabulum are cartilaginous and unossified. However, they may be helpful if there are concerns for other bony abnormalities (eg, congenital coxa vara, proximal femoral focal deficiency, and sacral agenesis) [34]. (See "Radiologic evaluation of the hip in infants, children, and adolescents", section on 'Imaging studies for specific clinical settings'.)When a hip radiograph is requested in a newborn, it should consist of a single anterior-posterior (AP) view with the hips held in 20 to 30º flexion. The flexion is necessary to accommodate the physiologic flexion contracture of the newborn hip.After four to six months of age, plain radiographs are more valuable in the evaluation for DDH [32,34]. When AP radiographs are obtained, the hips should be in the neutral position [34]. Radiographic lines and angles are used to assess acetabular development and hip position. Plain radiographic findings consistent with DDH include:●Lateral and superior positioning of the ossified portion of the femoral head and neck (image 3 and figure 10A-B)●Increased acetabular index (figure 11 and image 4); normal values for the acetabular index are as follows: <35° at birth; <25° at one year; <20° at two to three years; <15° at six to seven years; <11 to 12° at 10 years; and <10° at 15 years [39]●Delayed appearance of the femoral ossific nucleus on the involved side or asymmetric sizes of the femoral ossific nuclei (image 3)Other imaging — Other imaging modalities such as arthrography, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are not useful in the diagnosis of DDH, but may be used to evaluate postsurgical reduction. Arthrography (injection of radiopaque contrast into the hip joint) and CT are frequently obtained to confirm successful reduction and to determine the position of the femoral head within the acetabulum after casting. Pediatric protocols that involve reduced doses of radiation should be used.MRI is not typically used in the diagnostic evaluation of the young child with DDH, but its use is becoming more common in the evaluation of postsurgical reduction [40]. Compared with CT, MRI exposes the patient to no radiation and provides information about vascularity of the femoral head [41]. It is also helpful for evaluating long-term sequelae of partially treated or untreated DDH such as labral tears and arthritis.  [41]. (See "Radiologic evaluation of the hip in infants, children, and adolescents", section on 'Developmental dysplasia of the hip' and "Developmental dysplasia of the hip: Treatment and outcome", section on 'Outcome'.)DIAGNOSIS — The diagnosis of developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH) in infants is usually made by physical examination demonstrating hip instability (table 1), asymmetry (in unilateral cases), and/or limited abduction. Examination findings of DDH vary according to age (table 2). (See 'Hip instability' above and 'Asymmetry' above and 'Range of motion' above.)Diagnostic imaging can be used to make the diagnosis in infants with inconclusive examination findings. Diagnostic imaging also may be used to make the diagnosis in infants who have risk factors and normal examination. (See 'Diagnostic imaging' above and 'Infants with risk factors' below.)Ultrasonography generally is preferred for infants younger than four to six months of age and plain radiography for infants older than four to six months. Ultrasonographic measurements (figure 8) are used to classify DDH according to the Graf system (figure 9). Plain radiographic findings of DDH include lateral and superior positioning of the ossified portion of the femoral head and neck (image 3 and figure 10A-B); increased acetabular index (figure 11); and delayed appearance of the femoral ossific nucleus on the involved side or asymmetric sizes of the femoral ossific nuclei. (See 'Ultrasonography' above and 'Plain radiographs' above.)APPROACH TO DIAGNOSIS AND REFERRAL — Our approach to diagnosis and referral for developmental dysplasia of the hips (DDH) varies depending upon the age of the infant and the clinical examination findings. It is consistent with the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) clinical practice guideline for early detection of DDH, the American College of Radiology Appropriateness Criteria for DDH, and the American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine guideline for detection and assessment of DDH [2,34,36]. Local practices and preferences of the treating orthopedic surgeons may vary, particularly outside the United States.Newborn — We suggest that all newborn infants be examined for hip instability. We recommend that newborn infants with instability on examination be referred to an orthopedic surgeon who is experienced in the diagnosis and treatment of DDH for further evaluation and management. Decisions regarding imaging studies can be deferred to the consultant, who may use a variety of studies during management and follow-up. (See 'Hip instability' above and 'Diagnostic imaging' above.)If the examination is suboptimal (eg, the infant is not relaxed enough for a reliable assessment of motion and stability) or inconclusive (eg, no evidence of instability, but with joint clicks or thigh asymmetry), the infant is reexamined at two weeks of age. (See 'Two weeks of age' below.)The hips of newborn infants with normal examination should continue to be examined at subsequent health supervision visits. Imaging (at ≥6 weeks of age) may be warranted if risk factors are present. (See 'Examination' above and 'Infants with risk factors' below.)Two weeks of age — We recommend that two-week-old infants with instability or laxity on examination be referred to an orthopedic surgeon who is experienced in the diagnosis and treatment of DDH for further evaluation and management. Decisions regarding imaging studies can be deferred to the consultant, who may use a variety of studies during management and follow-up. (See 'Hip instability' above and 'Diagnostic imaging' above.)For two-week-old infants with inconclusive examination (eg, no evidence of instability, but with joint clicks or thigh asymmetry), we suggest referral to an orthopedic surgeon who is experienced in the diagnosis and treatment of DDH for further evaluation and management. Alternative courses of action, depending upon the level of suspicion, include [2,36]:●Ultrasonography at six to eight weeks (at which point "minor" ultrasonographic abnormalities found in newborns should be resolved) (see 'Ultrasonography' above and 'Natural history' above) ●Continuing to follow clinically (see 'Examination' above)The hips of two-week-old infants with normal examination should continue to be examined at subsequent health supervision visits. Imaging of such infants (at ≥6 weeks of age) may be warranted if risk factors are present. (See 'Examination' above and 'Infants with risk factors' below.)Older than two weeks — We recommend that infants older than two weeks with definite instability (table 1), asymmetric range of motion, or limited range of motion be referred to an orthopedic surgeon who is experienced in the diagnosis and treatment of DDH for further evaluation and management. Decisions regarding imaging studies can be deferred to the consultant, who may use a variety of studies during management and follow-up.We suggest that infants older than two weeks with subtle or nonspecific findings undergo imaging. We suggest imaging with ultrasonography if the infant is younger than six months and plain radiographs if the infant is older than six months of age.The hips of infants who have normal examination at two weeks of age should continue to be examined at subsequent health supervision visits until the child is walking normally. The pertinent examination findings vary depending on age (table 2). (See 'Examination' above and 'Age-specific findings of DDH' above.)Infants with risk factors — The estimated risk of DDH according to risk group is as follows [2]:●Girls with a breech presentation – 12 percent●Girls with a positive family history – 4.4 percent●Boys with a breech presentation – 2.6 percent●Girls – 1.9 percent●Boys with a positive family history – 0.9 percentThe risk of hip dislocation is greatly reduced if the newborn examination is normal, but imaging may be warranted based upon the clinician's risk threshold [2].We suggest imaging (by ultrasonography at four to six weeks of age) for girls with breech positioning at ≥34 weeks gestation (whether or not external cephalic version is successful). Ultrasonographic screening is an option for girls with a positive family history and boys with breech presentation. If ultrasonography is unavailable or a child with a risk factor presents at six months or older, screening may be done with a plain radiograph of the hips and pelvis. This strategy is consistent with the American Academy of Pediatrics clinical practice guideline and the American College of Radiology Appropriateness Criteria [2,34]. (See "Developmental dysplasia of the hip: Epidemiology and pathogenesis", section on 'Risk factors'.)The hips of infants with risk factors for DDH who have normal examination and normal imaging studies at six weeks (ultrasonography) or four months (plain radiographs) should continue to be examined at subsequent health supervision visits until the child is walking normally. The pertinent examination findings vary depending on age (table 2). (See 'Examination' above and 'Age-specific findings of DDH' above.)Normal ultrasonography at six weeks of age is not necessarily predictive of absence of dysplasia. In a retrospective study, 29 percent of 131 infants with breech presentation and normal hip ultrasonography at six weeks of age who returned for follow-up plain radiographs at an average of five months of age had hip dysplasia on plain radiographs at four to six months of age [42]. This finding suggests that infants with breech presentation require vigilant monitoring; the authors of the study suggest examination for limited abduction and plain radiographs at six months of age. We agree with this suggestion. ROUTINE SCREENING — Recommendations for screening newborn infants for developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH) vary from country to country. Some countries recommend screening of all infants, whereas others recommend screening only those with selective risk factors [43]. The age at which the child is screened and the approach to screening (eg, clinical examination versus ultrasonography versus an approach based on risk stratification) also varies from country to country [28,43].The United States Preventive Services Task Force concluded that evidence is insufficient to recommend routine screening of infants for DDH as a means to prevent adverse outcomes and that newborn screening leads to overdiagnosis of hips that do not benefit and may be harmed by treatment [44]. The Pediatric Orthopaedic Society of North America (POSNA) has responded to this recommendation by acknowledging a lack of data to support screening [45], but pointing to the value of early diagnosis in preventing long-term complications. POSNA recommends following the AAP Clinical Practice Guideline [2] with assessment for DDH at birth and every well-child visit until the child is walking normally. This approach is supported by a decision analysis that recommends screening of all infants with physical examination combined with selective use of ultrasound in infants that are high risk [46]. This is especially relevant given reports that missed diagnosis of DDH is a common cause for malpractice suits against pediatricians [47].INFORMATION FOR PATIENTS — UpToDate offers two types of patient education materials, “The Basics” and “Beyond the Basics.” The Basics patient education pieces are written in plain language, at the 5th to 6th grade reading level, and they answer the four or five key questions a patient might have about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who want a general overview and who prefer short, easy-to-read materials. Beyond the Basics patient education pieces are longer, more sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are written at the 10th to 12th grade reading level and are best for patients who want in-depth information and are comfortable with some medical jargon.Here are the patient education articles that are relevant to this topic. We encourage you to print or e-mail these topics to your patients. (You can also locate patient education articles on a variety of subjects by searching on “patient info” and the keyword(s) of interest.) ●Basics topic (see "Patient information: Developmental dysplasia of the hip (The Basics)") SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS●Developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH) describes a spectrum of conditions related to the development of the hip in infants and young children. It encompasses abnormal development of the acetabulum and proximal femur as well as mechanical instability of the hip joint (table 1). (See "Developmental dysplasia of the hip: Epidemiology and pathogenesis", section on 'Terminology'.)●Risk factors for DDH include breech positioning, family history of DDH, and female sex. (See 'History' above and "Developmental dysplasia of the hip: Epidemiology and pathogenesis", section on 'Risk factors'.)●Hip examination should occur soon after birth and at every health supervision visit until the child is walking normally (usually by two years of age). The symptoms and signs of DDH depend upon the age of the child and the severity of the abnormality (table 2). (See 'Schedule and overview' above and 'Age-specific findings of DDH' above.)●Physical examination techniques to detect hip instability use adduction and posterior pressure to feel for dislocatability (the Barlow maneuver) and abduction and elevation to feel for reducibility (the Ortolani maneuver). The sensation of dislocation or reduction is distinct and best described as a "jerk" or "clunk". Examination findings that are less specific for DDH include asymmetry (of femur length, skin folds, or gait) and decreased hip abduction. (See 'Hip instability' above and 'Asymmetry' above and 'Range of motion' above.)●Diagnostic imaging is helpful in confirming physical examination findings, evaluating infants with risk factors, and making treatment decisions. During the first four months of life, ultrasonography is the primary imaging technique for assessing the morphology and stability of the hip. Ultrasonographic measurements (figure 8) are used to classify DDH according to the Graf system (figure 9). (See 'Ultrasonography' above.)●The diagnosis of DDH in infants is usually made by physical examination demonstrating hip instability, asymmetry (in unilateral cases), and/or limited abduction. Absence of asymmetry does not exclude DDH because DDH is bilateral in 20 percent of cases. Examination findings of DDH vary according to age (table 2). Diagnostic imaging can be used to make the diagnosis in infants with inconclusive examination findings. Diagnostic imaging also may be used to make the diagnosis in infants who have risk factors and normal examination. (See 'Diagnosis' above.)●We recommend that infants and young children who have hip instability on examination (at any age) be referred to an orthopedic surgeon who is experienced in the diagnosis and treatment of DDH for further evaluation and management. (See 'Approach to diagnosis and referral' above.)●We suggest that two-week-old infants with equivocal examination findings (eg, no evidence of instability, but with joint clicks or thigh asymmetry) be referred to an orthopedic surgeon for further evaluation and management. Alternatively, ultrasonography may be obtained at six to eight weeks of age or the infant can continue to be followed clinically. (See 'Two weeks of age' above.)●We suggest imaging (by ultrasonography at four to six weeks of age) for girls with breech positioning at ≥34 weeks gestation (whether or not external cephalic version is successful). Imaging is an option for girls with a positive family history and boys with breech presentation. (See 'Infants with risk factors' above.)
		
