





shoulder
      


[shohl-der] 
/ˈʃoʊl dər/ 
 


Spell
Syllables






Synonyms 



Examples 



Word Origin 








noun  

1. 
the part of each side of the body in humans, at the top of the trunk, extending from each side of the base of the neck to the region where the arm articulates with the trunk. 


2. 
Usually, shoulders. these two parts together with the part of the back joining them. 


3. 
a corresponding part in animals. 

4. 
the upper foreleg and adjoining parts of a sheep, goat, etc. 

5. 
the joint connecting the arm or the foreleg with the trunk. 

6. 
a shoulderlike part or projection. 

7. 

Ornithology. the bend of a bird's wing, between the hand and the forearm, especially when distinctively colored, as in the red-shouldered hawk, Buteo lineatus.  

8. 
a cut of meat that includes the upper joint of the foreleg. 

9. 
Often, shoulders. Informal. capacity for bearing responsibility or blame or sympathizing with other people: If you want to tell me your troubles, I have broad shoulders.


10. 
a steplike change in the contour of an object, as for opposing or limiting motion along it or for an abutment. 

11. 

Carpentry.  
the end surface or surfaces of a piece from which a tenon or tenons project. 
an inclined and raised surface, as on a joggle post, for receiving and supporting the foot of a strut or the like. 



12. 

Fortification. the angle of a bastion between the face and the flank. 

13. 

Printing. the flat surface on a type body extending beyond the base of the letter or character. 

14. 
the part of a garment that covers, or fits over, the shoulder. 

15. 
(in leather manufacturing) that part of the hide anterior to the butt. 

16. 
either of the two edges or borders along a road, especially that portion on which vehicles can be parked in emergencies. Compare soft shoulder. 


17. 

shoulder season. 

18. 

Furniture. knee (def 6). 
















Expand 


verb (used with object)  

19. 
to push with or as if with the shoulder, especially roughly: to shoulder someone aside.



20. 
to take upon, support, or carry on or as if on the shoulder or shoulders: He shouldered his knapsack and walked on.



21. 
to assume as a responsibility: to shoulder the expense.


Expand 


verb (used without object)  

22. 
to push with or as if with the shoulder: to shoulder through a crowd.





Idioms  

23. 

cry on someone's shoulder, to reveal one's problems to another person in order to obtain sympathy: Don't cry on my shoulder—this mess is your own fault.



24. 

put one's shoulder to the wheel, to work energetically toward a goal; put forth effort: If we put our shoulders to the wheel, we'll be able to finish the job soon.



25. 

rub shoulders with, to come into association with; mingle with: As a social worker in one of the worst slum areas, she rubs shoulders with the poor and the helpless.


26. 

shoulder arms, Military. 
to place a rifle muzzle upward on the right or left shoulder, with the buttstock in the corresponding hand. 
the command to shoulder arms. 



27. 

shoulder to shoulder, side by side; with united effort: The volunteers worked shoulder to shoulder with the natives in harvesting the crops.


28. 

straight from the shoulder, without evasion; directly; candidly: The lawyer told him straight from the shoulder that his case was weak.





Expand 



Origin Expand 








Middle English





Old English






900


before 900; (noun) Middle English  sholder, s (c) hulder,  Old English  sculdor; cognate with Dutch  schouder,  German  Schulter; (v.) Middle English  shulderen, derivative of the noun 



Related forms Expand 



outshoulder, verb (used with object)  

reshoulder, verb (used with object)  

unshouldered, adjective  




Synonyms Expand 



21. bear, undertake, carry. 







Dictionary.com UnabridgedBased on the Random House Dictionary, © Random House, Inc. 2015.
Cite This Source




Examples from the web for shoulder
Expand



Winter hustling shoulder and heft: salt lick, brine spring. 
But in turtles, the ribs grow over the shoulder blades and fuse to form the upper shell. 
Apply a complete fertilizer when the first pods set, again when plants are shoulder high. 
It did what it was supposed to, it healed my shoulder pretty well. If some players appear smaller this season, it could be a result of the shrinking of their shoulder pads. It's worth trying, though, if only to make them look over their shoulder occasionally. She would look worriedly over her shoulder and then move away some distance. The red shoulder patch on red-winged blackbirds provides an excellent example. They always draw boldly from the get-go, using both their shoulder and arm, rather than merely the hand. With each stretch, swing a little higher, until you reach shoulder height. 







Expand



British Dictionary definitions for shoulder Expand




shoulder




/ˈʃəʊldə/ 






noun

1.

the part of the vertebrate body where the arm or a corresponding forelimb joins the trunk: the pectoral girdle and associated structures 


2.

the joint at the junction of the forelimb with the pectoral girdle 


3.

a cut of meat including the upper part of the foreleg 


4.

(printing) the flat surface of a piece of type from which the face rises 


5.

(tanning) the portion of a hide covering the shoulders and neck of the animal, usually including the cheeks 


6.

the part of a garment that covers the shoulder 


7.

anything that resembles a shoulder in shape or position 


8.

the strip of unpaved land that borders a road 


9.

(engineering) a substantial projection or abrupt change in shape or diameter designed to withstand thrust 


10.

(photog) the portion of the characteristic curve of a photographic material indicating the maximum density that can be produced on the material 


11.

(jewellery) the part of a ring where the shank joins the setting 


12.

a shoulder to cry on, a person one turns to for sympathy with one's troubles 


13.

(informal) give someone the cold shoulder 
to treat someone in a cold manner; snub
to ignore or shun someone




14.

(informal) put one's shoulder to the wheel, to work very hard 


15.

rub shoulders with, See rub (sense 11) 


16.

shoulder to shoulder 
side by side or close together
in a corporate effort





verb

17.

(transitive) to bear or carry (a burden, responsibility, etc) as if on one's shoulders 


18.

to push (something) with or as if with the shoulder 


19.

(transitive) to lift or carry on the shoulders 


20.

(military) shoulder arms, to bring the rifle vertically close to the right side with the muzzle uppermost and held at the trigger guard 






Word Origin 


Old English sculdor; related to Old High German sculterra 



 Expand

Collins English Dictionary - Complete & Unabridged 2012 Digital Edition © William Collins Sons & Co. Ltd. 1979, 1986 © HarperCollinsPublishers 1998, 2000, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2012
Cite This Source




Word Origin and History for shoulder Expand




n. 

Old English sculdor "shoulder," from West Germanic *skuldro (cf. Middle Dutch scouder, Dutch schouder, Old Frisian skoldere, Middle Low German scholder, Old High German scultra, German Schulter), of unknown origin, perhaps related to shield (n.). Meaning "edge of the road" is attested from 1933. Cold shoulder (Neh. ix:29) translates Latin humerum recedentum dare in Vulgate (but see cold shoulder). Shoulder-length, of hair, is from 1951.


v. 

c.1300, "to push with the shoulder," from shoulder (n.). Meaning "take a burden" first recorded 1580s. The military sense is from 1590s. Related: Shouldered; shouldering.



 

Online Etymology Dictionary, © 2010 Douglas Harper
Cite This Source




shoulder in Medicine Expand


shoulder shoul·der (shōl'dər)n. 
 The joint connecting the arm with the torso.  The part of the human body between the neck and upper arm.
 

The American Heritage® Stedman's Medical DictionaryCopyright © 2002, 2001, 1995 by Houghton Mifflin Company. Published by Houghton Mifflin Company.
Cite This Source




Slang definitions & phrases for shoulder Expand


shot in the dark
noun

A wild guess or try; an attempt that has little chance of success 



The Dictionary of American Slang, Fourth Edition by Barbara Ann Kipfer, PhD. and Robert L. Chapman, Ph.D.Copyright (C) 2007 by HarperCollins Publishers.
Cite This Source




Idioms and Phrases with shoulder Expand




shoulder






In addition to the idiom beginning with 


shoulder


 also see:

broad shoulders
chip on one's shoulder
cold shoulder
cry on someone's shoulder
good head on one's shoulders
head and shoulders above
on one's shoulders
put one's shoulder to the wheel
rub elbows (shoulders) with
shrug one's shoulders
square one's shoulders
straight from the shoulder
weight of the world on one's shoulders








 Expand

The American Heritage® Idioms DictionaryCopyright © 2002, 2001, 1995 by Houghton Mifflin Company. Published by Houghton Mifflin Company.
Cite This Source




Encyclopedia Article for shoulder Expand





in anatomy, the joint between the arm, or forelimb, and the trunk, together with the adjacent tissue, particularly the tissue over the shoulder blade, or scapula. The shoulder, or pectoral, girdle is composed of the clavicles (collarbones) and the scapulae (shoulder blades). In humans the clavicles join the sternum (breastbone) medially and the scapulae laterally; the scapulae, however, are joined to the trunk only by muscles. In many cursorial (running) mammals the clavicles are reduced or no longer present, which permits free movement of the humerus (upper arm bone) in a forward direction. The major joint of the shoulder is the glenohumeral joint, a ball-and-socket joint in which the humerus is recessed into the scapula. The flexibility of the shoulder has permitted various locomotor adaptations, such as digging (in moles), running (in antelopes), brachiation (in gibbons), and flight (in birds).



Learn more about shoulder with a free trial on Britannica.com

 

Encyclopedia Britannica, 2008. Encyclopedia Britannica Online.
Cite This Source



