
			INTRODUCTION — Individuals may acquire a multitude of benign skin lesions over the course of a lifetime. Many of these lesions are easily visible, and patients often ask clinicians to confirm that new growths on the skin are benign. Most benign skin lesions are diagnosed on the basis of clinical appearance and history. If the diagnosis of a lesion is uncertain, or if a lesion has exhibited unexpected changes in appearance or symptoms, a diagnostic procedure (eg, biopsy, excision) is indicated to confirm the diagnosis.Benign lesions that are symptomatic or cosmetically bothersome can often be managed with simple procedures, such as cryotherapy, electrosurgery, or excision. The clinical features, diagnosis, and treatment of some common acquired skin lesions will be discussed here. Malignant neoplasms of the skin are discussed separately. (See "Epidemiology and clinical features of basal cell carcinoma" and "Pathologic characteristics of melanoma" and "Clinical features and diagnosis of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)".)DERMAL TUMORSAcrochordon (skin tag) — Acrochordons, commonly known as skin tags, are an outgrowth of normal skin (picture 1A-E). They appear as pedunculated lesions on narrow stalks. Skin tags occur in approximately 25 percent of adults; the risk increases with age [1].There is a familial tendency for these lesions. Perianal skin tags are common in patients with Crohn's disease. (See "Perianal complications of Crohn disease".) Skin tags also appear with increased frequency during the second trimester of pregnancy and may regress postpartum [2]. Skin tags have been reported to occur in association with colonic polyps, but these studies have predominantly been in patients with an increased incidence of polyps; studies in the primary care setting have failed to confirm such an association [3].Acrochordons usually occur in sites of friction, particularly the axilla, neck, inframammary, and inguinal regions. They become symptomatic when caught on jewelry or rubbed by clothing. Sometimes they become twisted on their blood supply and turn red or black (picture 1F).The diagnosis of acrochordons is based solely upon clinical appearance. They must be differentiated from the following lesions:●Neurofibromas usually are larger and firmer than acrochordons●Pedunculated dermal nevus sometimes can only be differentiated histologicallyTreatment is indicated if lesions are irritating or the patient desires removal for cosmetic reasons. Local anesthesia with 1% lidocaine with epinephrine, 0.9% normal saline, or EMLA cream may be required in larger lesions. Treatment options include (see "Dermatologic procedures"):●Excision with forceps or fine grade scissors; larger lesions may require suturing●Cryosurgery with liquid nitrogen●ElectrodesiccationLesions often bleed freely. Thus, aluminum chloride, silver nitrate sticks, or electrosurgery should be readily available.Patients can expect to get new lesions in predisposed areas rather than recurrences.Dermatofibroma — Dermatofibromas represent a benign proliferation of fibroblasts that sometimes occur as a result of trauma or insect bites, but often are idiopathic. Most patients have isolated lesions, although some have up to ten at a time.Dermatofibromas are firm, often hyperpigmented nodules, most commonly located on the lower extremities. They occur most often in adults. The lesions are usually asymptomatic, but may be pruritic. Women with dermatofibromas on their legs commonly complain of repeated trauma when shaving their legs, and therefore may seek removal of the lesions.Dermatofibromas are recognized as discrete, firm lesions, 0.3 to 1.0 cm in diameter, that are nontender and that dimple when pinched together because of the fibrous nature of the lesion (picture 2A-C). Diagnosis is based upon clinical appearance. If the lesion is longstanding, it should have no history of change in appearance.Dermatofibromas must be differentiated from nevi. The former tend to be firmer, and nevi do not button hole or dimple when pinched.Dermatofibromas also must be differentiated from basal cell carcinomas. Nodular basal cells usually are waxy and have telangiectasias. Biopsy is rarely necessary to differentiate the two.Usually, no treatment is required unless the lesion is symptomatic, has recently changed in size or color, or is bleeding. When the lesion protrudes above the skin surface and is irritated from repeated trauma, consider partial removal with cryosurgery or shave excision. Warn patients that the lesion may recur and that the scar can look worse than the initial lesion, especially on the lower extremity. Excision with suture is indicated for any changing lesion, because rarely dermatofibromas may develop into dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. (See "Head and neck sarcomas".)Neurofibroma — Cutaneous neurofibromas are benign tumors composed of cells of neuromesenchymal origin. Although multiple neurofibromas may occur in the setting of neurofibromatosis, neurofibromas most commonly occur as sporadic, solitary lesions in healthy adults. (See "Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1): Pathogenesis, clinical features, and diagnosis".)Cutaneous neurofibromas typically present as asymptomatic, soft, flesh-colored or hyperpigmented papules or nodules that are less than two centimeters in diameter (picture 3). Applying direct pressure to some neurofibromas may make them seem to retract into the skin, a finding that has been described as the "button-hole" sign. The clinical differential diagnosis for neurofibromas often includes dermal melanocytic nevi (picture 4) and acrochorda (picture 1A). (See "Acquired melanocytic nevi (moles)" and 'Acrochordon (skin tag)' above.)Treatment is not necessary for solitary cutaneous neurofibromas. Surgical excision can be used to remove lesions when the diagnosis is in question or when removal is desired due to discomfort or cosmetic concerns.EPIDERMAL TUMORSSeborrheic keratosis — Seborrheic keratoses are common epidermal tumors, usually developing after age 50 although occasionally in young adulthood. These lesions represent a benign proliferation of immature keratinocytes. The number of seborrheic keratoses can vary from an isolated lesion to literally hundreds present in the same person. The tendency for seborrheic keratoses may be inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion or associated with the healing phase of inflammatory skin diseases. There is no way to prevent the development of new lesions.The sign of Leser-Trelat, which refers to the sudden appearance of multiple seborrheic keratoses in association with skin tags and acanthosis nigricans, has been associated with a variety of malignancies, including gastrointestinal and lung cancers. The observation that both seborrheic keratoses and cancer are common in older adult patients has caused some to question this association, although the simultaneous development of acanthosis nigricans suggests that this may be a true neoplastic syndrome. (See "Cutaneous manifestations of internal malignancy", section on 'Sign of Leser-Trelat' and "Cutaneous manifestations of internal malignancy", section on 'Acanthosis nigricans'.)As mentioned, seborrheic keratoses are benign lesions. However, they have been reported in association with a number of other skin malignancies, most commonly basal cell carcinomas and infrequently melanoma [4].The diagnosis is based on the clinical appearance of "stuck on," warty, well-circumscribed, often scaly hyperpigmented lesions located most commonly on the trunk, face, and upper extremities (picture 5A-D). Close inspection with a hand lens often will demonstrate the presence of horn cysts or dark keratin plugs. Lesions should almost be able to be picked off with a no. 15 blade. Biopsy may be necessary to confirm the diagnosis for atypical lesions.Seborrheic keratoses should be differentiated from the following:●Nevus does not have a stuck-on or warty appearance, and there is an absence of scale.●Melanoma does not have a stuck-on warty appearance. Look for blurring of borders, asymmetry, and a history of a changing mole.●Pigmented basal cell carcinomas should have a history of a slowly changing lesion, along with a waxy appearance. Look for dilated blood vessels and any ulceration.Dermatosis papulosa nigra is a variant of seborrheic keratosis commonly found on the faces of black patients. Lesions are small, darkly pigmented papules, which may be pedunculated (picture 6).No treatment is indicated for most seborrheic keratoses. Lesions that are symptomatic or that cause cosmetic problems can be removed. Any of the following treatments are acceptable (see "Dermatologic procedures" and "Skin biopsy techniques").●Liquid nitrogen therapy is usually successful, although thicker lesions may not respond. Hypopigmentation often occurs with healing.●Liquid nitrogen therapy with curettage is useful for thicker lesions. Curette while the freeze ball is present.●Snip or shave excision after anesthesia with 1% lidocaine.●Electrodesiccation alone or followed by curettage after anesthesia.●Excisional biopsy with a no. 15 scalpel blade into the subcutaneous fat is indicated to rule out a melanoma or biopsy a pigmented basal cell carcinoma in any suspect lesion.APPENDAGE TUMORSPilomatricoma — Pilomatricoma (pilomatrixoma, calcifying epithelioma of Malherbe) is a relatively uncommon benign skin neoplasm, probably derived from matrical cells of the hair follicle. A mutation in the gene for beta-catenin, a protein involved in cell differentiation and proliferation, has been identified in some lesions [5].Pilomatricomas are asymptomatic papules or nodules that most frequently occur on the head, neck, or upper extremities. They are typically firm to the touch, due to the presence of calcification within the lesions. This calcification may lead to the identification of the "teeter-totter sign" in larger pilomatricomas, in which depression of one side of the lesion leads to elevation of the other side [6]. Pilomatricomas are often skin-colored, but a bluish or reddish discoloration of the overlying skin is present in some patients (picture 14D).Pilomatricomas most commonly appear in childhood or adolescence, but may also occur in adults. They are usually solitary, but cases of multiple lesions have been reported [7]. Multiple pilomatricomas may be familial and have been reported in association with myotonic dystrophy and other genetic disorders [8-15]. Malignant transformation is rare.The histopathologic findings of pilomatricomas are distinctive. A well-demarcated cyst-like structure containing peripheral small, basophilic cells, and central, eosinophilic, keratinized cells is located in the lower dermis and may extend into the subcutaneous fat. The eosinophilic cells are often called "shadow" or "ghost" cells due to the absence of nuclei. Calcium deposits are present in most neoplasms; ossification may also be seen. Multinucleated giant cells are often present.Surgical excision is generally recommended for pilomatricomas, to prevent growth or cosmetic disfigurement.Epidermoid cyst — Epidermoid cysts, also called epidermal cysts or epidermal inclusion cysts, are discrete nodules that often are referred to erroneously as sebaceous cysts, when in fact there is no sebaceous component. They are the most common cause of cutaneous cysts.The cyst wall consists of normal epidermis that produces keratin. This epidermis may have become lodged in the dermis as a result of trauma or comedone, although often there is no history of an antecedent condition. Lesions may remain stable or progressively enlarge. Spontaneous inflammation and rupture can occur, with significant involvement of surrounding tissue. There is no way to predict which lesions will remain quiescent and which will become larger or inflamed.Gardner's syndrome is a rare condition of multiple epidermal inclusion cysts associated with colon cancer. The syndrome is familial and inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. Cysts are unusual in number and location (extremities rather than face, base of ears, and trunk). (See "Gardner syndrome".)The diagnosis of epidermoid cyst is based upon the clinical appearance and palpation of a discrete, freely movable cyst or nodule, often with a central punctum (picture 7A-B). These lesions are differentiated from pilar cysts, which occur on the scalp and face and are derived from hair root sheaths; they are benign lesions and can be treated in a similar fashion. Nasal gliomas are another possible confusing diagnosis; these occur at the nasal root, are often present at birth, and may communicate with brain matter. Be cautious of cyst-like structures centrally located on the scalp that have been present since birth; these may have communicating features with the central nervous system.Inflamed, uninfected epidermoid cysts often resolve spontaneously without therapy, although they tend to recur. Treatment is not necessary unless desired by the patient. Injection of Kenalog, 3 mg/mL for the face and 10 mg/mL for the trunk into the surrounding inflamed dermis can hasten the resolution of inflammation and may prevent infection and the need for incision and drainage. Only small amounts (enough to slightly distend the cyst) should be injected since injection of larger amounts can result in scarring.Excision is best accomplished when the lesion is not inflamed; when the cyst is acutely inflamed the cyst wall is very friable, complete excision usually is not possible, and recurrence is likely. Thus, it is reasonable to wait four to six weeks after inflammation has resolved before attempting excision. A description of cyst excision can be found separately. (See "Dermatologic procedures".)Infected, fluctuant cysts tend to be larger, more erythematous, and more painful than sterile inflamed cysts, although an intense inflammatory response to cyst rupture may also present as a fluctuant nodule. Fluctuant cysts require incision and drainage of the purulent material. Incise with a no. 11 blade and drain after anesthesia with 1% lidocaine. The contents are then scraped out with a curette. We usually place an iodoform gauze wick into the cavity and leave in place for 24 hours, replacing the wick if the cyst is not draining effectively after this period of time. The wick is gradually withdrawn over a one to three week period.The presence of significant surrounding cellulitis or cysts that have not responded to drainage may require oral antibiotic therapy, although in most cases the lesions are sterile. Tetracycline or erythromycin may be used for their antiinflammatory effects to reduce edema and erythema in mild to moderately inflamed lesions.Bacteria, if involved, include aerobes alone (most commonly Staphylococcus aureus), anaerobes alone, or a mixed infection [16]. The drained contents should be sent for culture; amoxicillin-clavulanate is a reasonable empiric oral antibiotic choice pending culture results.Pilar cysts — Pilar cysts (trichilemmal cysts) resemble epidermoid cysts as they are firm, slow growing subcutaneous nodules. However, these cysts are derived from the root sheath of the hair follicle and are most commonly located on the scalp (picture 8A-B).Seventy percent of patients with pilar cysts have a familial component, present after puberty, and often present with multiple nodules. The cysts can slowly enlarge up to 5 cm.Removal of these lesions is usually easier than removing epidermoid cysts, since the cyst wall is firm and tends not to rupture as easily.VASCULAR TUMORSCherry angioma — Cherry angiomas, also known as De Morgan spots, are mature capillary proliferations that are common in middle-aged and older adult patients. They usually occur as multiple lesions, most commonly on the trunk, and bleed profusely with any traumatic rupture. They are often dome-shaped, typically 0.1 to 0.4 cm in diameter, and always blanch with pressure, though some are more fibrotic and may not blanch completely (picture 9A-B).Cherry angiomas must be differentiated from a Spitz nevus; the latter is an erythematous, isolated, dome-shaped papule or nodule that usually occurs in young children. Cherry angiomas may also be confused with amelanotic melanomas, which are usually friable lesions that may have recently changed in size or configuration.Treatment is only necessary for patients who are bothered by the lesions. Patients should be advised, however, that even after therapy new lesions are likely to develop and there is no known way to prevent them.The following modes of therapy may be used:●Small lesions can be electrocauterized after anesthesia with 1% lidocaine. Do not use lidocaine with epinephrine for small lesions because they may be obscured by the epinephrine.●Shave excision and electrocauterization of the base is useful for larger lesions.●Pulsed dye vascular laser therapy can be used to remove superficial lesions in isolated cases or for cosmesis, but the high cost rarely warrants this treatment.Pyogenic granuloma — Pyogenic granuloma or lobular capillary hemangioma is a benign vascular tumor of the skin (picture 10A-D) or mucous membranes (picture 11) characterized by rapid growth and friable surface that bleeds profusely after minor trauma. Pyogenic granuloma occurs in patients of all ages, with a peak incidence in the second and third decade of life. The cause of this is unknown. Reported trigger factors include trauma and medications. Pyogenic granuloma is discussed in detail separately. (See "Pyogenic granuloma (Lobular capillary hemangioma)".)ADIPOPCYTE TUMORSLipoma — Superficial subcutaneous lipomas are the most common benign soft-tissue neoplasms. Since superficial lipomas rarely cause symptoms, patients bring them to the attention of their providers either because they are concerned about the possibility of cancer or because of the cosmetic deformity of larger lesions.Lipomas are collections of mature fat cells, enclosed by thin fibrous capsules, and they can occur on any part of the body where fat cells coalesce. They are usually found superficially in the subcutaneous tissue, but can more rarely involve fascia or deeper muscular planes. The etiology of lipoma development is not well understood.A lipoma often looks like a small "golf ball" under the skin, albeit one that is soft due to the fat cells within the neoplasm (picture 12). Frequently, patients may have more than one lipoma, and occasionally they may have a genetic condition resulting in multiple lipomas (familial multiple lipomatosis). Malignant transformation of a lipoma into a liposarcoma is rare.The diagnosis of lipoma is usually made clinically, based on the fact that lipomas are soft, asymptomatic, and usually do not enlarge quickly. If a suspected lipoma causes symptoms (pain or restriction of movement), is rapidly enlarging, or is firm rather than soft, a biopsy is indicated.The treatment of a lipoma, if needed because of pain, cosmesis, or concerns over diagnosis, is surgical removal of the fat cells and fibrous capsule. Recurrence of an excised lipoma is not common.Side effects of surgery include scarring, seroma, and hematoma formation. In areas that are cosmetically sensitive, a surgical technique with segmental extraction and minimal surface incision may limit the scar size [17]. Alternative treatment modalities include liposuction and injection with low concentrations of deoxycholate [18,19]. Deoxycholate injections led to improvement in an open-label study of six patients [19]; however, further studies are necessary before this agent can be routinely recommended.Angiolipoma — Angiolipoma is a benign tumor of adipocytes typically occurring in adolescents and young adults. Angiolipoma presents as a soft subcutaneous nodule of 0.5 to 2 cm in diameter, usually located on the forearm and chest wall (picture 13). Lesions are frequently multiple and painful. Angiolipomas have been reported in HIV-infected individuals after starting antiretroviral therapy [20].  Clinically, angiolipomas closely resemble lipomas, although angiolipomas are usually painful and tender. Histology is necessary for diagnosis; it reveals a circumscribed, encapsulated tumor composed of an admixture of mature adipose cells and capillary vessels. Fibrin thrombi are typically seen. Occasionally, a predominance of blood vessels can be seen (cellular angiolipomas). The vascular proliferation component is not seen in lipomas.Single, painful lesions can be excised. The treatment of multiple lesions is difficult. Liposuction has been used in a few cases [21,22].GLOMUS TUMOR — Glomus tumor is a rare, benign neoplasm composed of cells resembling smooth cells of the normal glomus body [23]. It is usually located in areas of the skin that are rich in glomus bodies (eg, the subungual regions of digits or the deep dermis of the palm, wrist, forearm, and foot). Glomus tumors of the fingers and toes occur in approximately 5 percent of patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) and are considered NF1-associated neoplasms [24-26].Glomus tumor presents as a pink or purple vascular papule or nodule associated with paroxysmal pain, cold sensitivity, and tenderness. Subungual glomus tumors are particularly painful. Nail dystrophy and/or a bluish-red flush are typically seen (picture 14A-C). The diagnosis is suspected on the basis of the clinical appearance and history of paroxysmal pain and cold sensitivity. Histopathologic examination of the excised tumor is necessary to confirm the diagnosis. Histologically, glomus tumor is a well circumscribed dermal nodule composed of glomus cells, vasculature, and smooth muscle cells. Solid glomus tumor, with scarce vasculature and scant muscle component, is the most common variant [23]. Less common variants include glomangioma, with prominent vascular component, and glomangiomyoma, with prominent vascular and smooth muscle components.Treatment is surgical excision. For subungual tumors, preoperative imaging studies with color Doppler ultrasonography and magnetic resonance may provide information on tumor size, shape, and precise anatomic location [27]. MELANOCYTE PROLIFERATIONSMelanocytic nevi — Melanocytic nevi (moles) are common neoplasms that result from the proliferation of cutaneous melanocytes. Nevi frequently present as pigmented macules, papules, or plaques, but may also be flesh-colored or pink. (See "Acquired melanocytic nevi (moles)" and "Congenital melanocytic nevi".)Solar lentigo — Solar lentigo, most commonly known as liver spots or "old age'' spots, is a proliferation of normal melanocytes secondary to chronic solar damage. These lesions occur most commonly in whites with fair complexion who have a history of chronic sun exposure. Hyperpigmentation may vary from light to dark brown, but is uniform within an individual lesion.Diagnosis is based on the clinical appearance of flat, oval, evenly pigmented macules in areas of chronic sun exposure, particularly the face, dorsa of the hands, shoulders, and back (picture 15A-B). These lesions must be differentiated from the following:●Seborrheic keratoses – Early on, these lesions may be difficult to differentiate. Scale and palpable components are features of seborrheic keratoses.●Lentigo maligna – Lesions have variable pigmentation, irregular borders, and a history of gradual enlargement.●Lentigo maligna melanoma – This cancerous lesion has an irregular border, variable pigmentation, and may have a raised papule or nodule within the plaque. The history is of gradual change, usually over years.No treatment is needed unless the patient desires removal for cosmetic reasons. Liquid nitrogen applied for 5 seconds or less can be used if treatment is desired. Melanocytes are very sensitive to liquid nitrogen and are destroyed easily with small amounts and short exposure times. Lesions may heal with hypopigmentation. Any area that has changed color or developed a papular or nodular component should be biopsied. Patients should be educated on the use of sunscreens and sun protection; regular use of sunscreens prevents the development of solar lentigo although does not lead to regression of current lesions [28]. Hydroquinone cream 4% plus sun protection can lighten existing lesions. Thin seborrheic keratoses, which are sometimes mistaken for lentigines, will not respond to topical hydroquinone.SEBACEOUS HYPERPLASIA — Sebaceous hyperplasia is a common skin condition involving hypertrophy of sebaceous glands. Lesions occur particularly on the central face of adults. Patients usually are concerned about the lesions either because of fear of skin cancer or because of cosmesis. The diagnosis is clinical and based upon the appearance of an isolated, yellow papule on the face of an adult and no history of recent change (picture 16). Lesions must be differentiated from basal cell carcinomas, which usually have a history of recent change in size and tend not to be yellow, and sebaceous carcinoma, a rare lesion that presents as a yellow papule that has a history of recent change in size or shape. (See "Epidemiology and clinical features of basal cell carcinoma".)No treatment is necessary unless patients are worried about cancer or the lesion is cosmetically bothersome. When treatment is desired, electrosurgery can be performed by anesthetizing with 1% lidocaine, cauterizing using low energy levels to prevent scarring, and using a small curette or gauze to remove charred tissue. Alternatively, shave excision may be useful for isolated, large lesions or to rule out malignancy. Trichloroacetic acid 35% has also been used to superficially "peel" the lesions, although more than one application may be necessary and hypopigmentation may occur. Consider referral for carbon dioxide laser or dermabrasion for patients with diffuse lesions.CHONDRODERMATITIS NODULARIS HELICIS — Chondrodermatitis nodularis helicis (CNH) is a solitary, firm, painful nodule <10 mm in size, located on the helix or, less frequently, on the antihelix of the ear [29]. It is thought to result from cartilage inflammation that in extreme cases may cause cartilage necrosis and transepithelial elimination of degenerated collagen. Etiologic factors include chronic trauma, chronic sun exposure, low temperature, and prolonged or excessive pressure with compromise of local blood supply. An association with systemic diseases, including connective tissue and cardiovascular disease also has been suggested [30].  CNH occurs most often in middle-aged or older men and is usually unilateral and typically develops on the same side the patient lies on in bed (picture 17) [29]. The nodule enlarges rapidly over a few months and then remains stable. The surface is frequently covered with a scale or crust that conceals a small ulcer. Pain is initiated by pressure or by changes in the ambient temperature and lasts from a few minutes to a few hours. Diagnosis is based upon the clinical appearance history of rapid development of a nodular lesion with associated pain and tenderness. If the diagnosis is in doubt, the lesion should be excised and sent for histopathologic examination. Histology shows a nodule of degenerated collagen surrounded by a lymphohistiocytic infiltrate; a central ulceration through which the degenerated collagen is extruded is often present. The differential diagnosis includes basal cell carcinoma (picture 18), keratoacanthoma (picture 19), squamous cell carcinoma (picture 20), and tophus (picture 21). Conservative treatment includes strategies to relieve pressure and intralesional or topical corticosteroids. The use of a donut-shaped pillow or foam padding for several weeks may provide resolution of symptoms [31-34]. Intralesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide may provide rapid pain relief in most patients and long-term resolution of CNH in some [35]. Other treatments that have been evaluated in small numbers of patients include 2% topical nitroglycerin and photodynamic therapy [36-38]. Surgical approaches include cryotherapy, curettage, carbon dioxide laser ablation, wedge excision, and cartilage removal alone [39-43]. Recurrence after surgical excision has been reported in 10 to 30 percent of patients [33,44]. VENOUS LAKE — Venous lakes are lesions of dilated capillaries on the face, lips, and ears of older adult patients. The lesions bleed easily following minor trauma.Diagnosis is based upon the appearance of the blue lesion in characteristic locations that disappear when compressed with a glass slide (picture 22). Venous lakes should be differentiated from blue nevi, which do not disappear with compression and do not usually appear on the face, ears, or lips. Nodular melanomas also can be confused with venous lakes, but do not disappear with compression, remaining a firm nodule.Electrosurgery after anesthesia with 1% lidocaine can be used if the lesion causes a bleeding problem or is cosmetically unacceptable. Pulsed dye vascular laser may remove lesions without causing a scar [45].CALLUSES AND CORNS — Calluses and corns (clavi) are among the most frequent skin conditions and, by virtue of their location on the feet, may be the source of considerable disability, discomfort, and pain.●Calluses are a diffuse thickening of the outermost layer of the skin, the stratum corneum, in response to repeated friction or pressure (picture 23A).●Corns develop similarly, but differ by having a central "core" that is hyperkeratotic and often painful (picture 24A-B). Corns typically occur at pressure points secondary to ill-fitting shoes, an underlying bony spur, or an abnormal gait.These lesions are typically located on the plantar aspect of prominent metatarsals, between toe clefts, or on the dorsal aspect of toe joints.The diagnosis of calluses and corns is based upon their clinical appearance. They must be differentiated from plantar warts. After paring down, warts will have several dark specks that represent punctate capillary thromboses. Warts also disrupt normal skin markings so that the skin lines are no longer evident. Skin lines are more prominent in callosities.Calluses and corns are treated the same. Treatment begins with prevention. Patients should be advised to avoid ill-fitting shoes. Consider referring patients with severe recurrent problems for orthotic consultation to fit inner soles or metatarsal bars.The treatment of choice for calluses or corns is application of salicylic acid plasters. Salicylic acid plaster 40% is available without a prescription.●Debulk the callus or corn by paring skin with a no. 15 scalpel blade.●Cut the plaster to the size of the lesion.●Leave in place for 48 to 72 hours; keep dry.●Pare down the remaining skin; replace the plaster patch and let the patient resume proper foot care. Tape can be used to keep the patch in place; the patch can be left on all day as long as it is confined to the involved site and does not slip onto unaffected areas. Patients should be advised to remove the white "dead" skin with a metal nail file or pumice stone each night before replacing the patch. Use of the patch should stop once the lesion has resolved.●Follow up if lesions do not resolve within one to two weeks.●Do NOT use plaster in patients with peripheral neuropathies. These patients may not notice pain with improper patch placement and can develop damage to normal skin.Salicylic acid 10% to 20% in petrolatum (available in 30 to 45 g tubes) is available by prescription and compounded by a pharmacist. This preparation may be useful for callous or corn formation that is too large for plaster use, but it is not useful for warts.Consider obtaining a foot radiograph to evaluate for an underlying bony abnormality in lesions that are recalcitrant or recurrent.INFORMATION FOR PATIENTS — UpToDate offers two types of patient education materials, "The Basics" and "Beyond the Basics." The Basics patient education pieces are written in plain language, at the 5th to 6th grade reading level, and they answer the four or five key questions a patient might have about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who want a general overview and who prefer short, easy-to-read materials. Beyond the Basics patient education pieces are longer, more sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are written at the 10th to 12th grade reading level and are best for patients who want in-depth information and are comfortable with some medical jargon.Here are the patient education articles that are relevant to this topic. We encourage you to print or e-mail these topics to your patients. (You can also locate patient education articles on a variety of subjects by searching on "patient info" and the keyword(s) of interest.) ●Basics topics (see "Patient information: Skin tags (acrochordon) (The Basics)" and "Patient information: Seborrheic keratosis (The Basics)" and "Patient information: Corns and calluses (The Basics)")SUMMARY●Most benign skin lesions are diagnosed on the basis of clinical appearance and history. If the diagnosis of a lesion is uncertain, or if a lesion has exhibited unexpected changes in appearance or symptoms, a diagnostic procedure (eg, biopsy, excision) is indicated to confirm the diagnosis. (See 'Introduction' above.)●Benign lesions that are symptomatic or cosmetically bothersome can often be managed with simple procedures, such as cryotherapy, electrosurgery, or excision. (See 'Introduction' above.)●Benign skin lesions that occur in adults and children include:•Dermal tumors (acrochordon (picture 1A-F), dermatofibroma (picture 2A-C), cutaneous neurofibroma (picture 3))•Epidermal tumors (seborrheic keratosis (picture 5A-D))•Appendage tumors (pilomatricoma (picture 14D), epidermoid cyst (picture 7A-B), pilar cyst (picture 8A-B))•Vascular tumors (cherry hemangioma (picture 9A-B), pyogenic granuloma) (see "Pyogenic granuloma (Lobular capillary hemangioma)")•Adipocyte tumors (lipoma (picture 12), angiolipoma (picture 13))•Glomus tumor (picture 14A-D)•Melanocyte proliferations (melanocytic nevi, solar lentigo (picture 15A-B)) (see "Acquired melanocytic nevi (moles)" and "Congenital melanocytic nevi")•Proliferation of sebaceous glands (sebaceous hyperplasia (picture 16))•Vascular dilation (venous lake (picture 22))•Hyperkeratotic reactions to chronic friction (calluses (picture 23A-B) and corns (picture 24A-B))
		
