
			INTRODUCTION — Carotid arterial atherosclerosis is a common cause of stroke. Carotid endarterectomy (CEA) and carotid artery stenting (CAS) are both established revascularization interventions [1,2]. This topic will review the anesthetic management of patients undergoing elective CEA or CAS, utilizing the options of either general anesthesia or local/regional anesthesia [3,4]. The indications for carotid revascularization and the surgical considerations in selecting treatment with CEA or CAS are reviewed elsewhere [1,2,5]. (See "Management of asymptomatic carotid atherosclerotic disease" and "Management of symptomatic carotid atherosclerotic disease" and "Carotid endarterectomy" and "Carotid artery stenting and its complications".) PREANESTHESIA CONSULTATIONCardiovascular comorbidity — A major focus of the preanesthesia evaluation is to detect and optimize cardiac conditions. Many patients presenting for carotid interventions have coexisting coronary atherosclerosis and increased risk for perioperative morbidity due to myocardial ischemia [6]. A 12-lead electrocardiogram should be routinely performed for all patients undergoing carotid endarterectomy (CEA) or carotid artery stenting (CAS). Further consultation with a cardiologist may be warranted in patients with severe or unstable heart disease. (See "Evaluation of cardiac risk prior to noncardiac surgery" and "Management of cardiac risk for noncardiac surgery" and "Noncardiac surgery in patients with aortic stenosis".)Medications — Appropriate perioperative medication management reduces cardiovascular risk and minimizes thrombotic complications.●Statins and beta blockers should be continued in patients already receiving these therapies. (See "Management of cardiac risk for noncardiac surgery", section on 'Statins' and "Management of cardiac risk for noncardiac surgery", section on 'Beta blockers'.) ●Recommendations regarding starting new statin therapy prior to carotid endarterectomy are discussed separately. (See "Carotid endarterectomy", section on 'Statins' and "Carotid artery stenting and its complications", section on 'Perioperative statins'.)●Aspirin and/or clopidogrel therapy are recommended prior to CEA or CAS. (See "Carotid endarterectomy", section on 'Aspirin' and "Carotid artery stenting and its complications", section on 'Antiplatelet therapy'.)GENERAL VERSUS LOCAL/REGIONAL ANESTHESIA — Carotid revascularization can be performed using either general anesthesia or local/regional anesthesia.Anesthetic goals — Regardless of anesthetic technique, the most important anesthetic goals for carotid revascularization are to:●Ensure that the patient is promptly awake and able to fully cooperate with a neurologic examination for early stroke detection at the end of the procedure.●Avoid wide variations in blood pressure and/or heart rate throughout the procedure.Choice of anesthesia — The available evidence suggests that the choice of anesthetic technique has no significant impact on major adverse primary outcomes (eg, death, stroke, myocardial infarction) after carotid endarterectomy (CEA). However, length of stay in the intensive care unit and hospital and certain adverse outcomes (eg, hemodynamic instability, delirium) may be reduced in patients receiving local/regional anesthesia compared with general anesthesia. (See "Carotid endarterectomy", section on 'Anesthesia'.)The choice of general anesthesia versus local/regional anesthesia in an awake patient is determined in consultation with the surgeon, considering the individual patient’s characteristics and preferences. General anesthesia is more commonly used in the United States for CEA [7]. Carotid artery stenting (CAS) is more typically performed with local/regional anesthesia [8-10]. Ideally, the anesthesiology team is competent and comfortable with either technique because there might be specific medical, surgical, or patient-centered reasons that make one anesthetic technique more advantageous than the other [8].Advantages of local/regional anesthesia — The major advantage of the local/regional anesthetic technique for carotid interventions is the ability to continuously monitor neurologic function by simply talking to the awake patient and asking him to perform basic tasks with the contralateral hand, rather than using EEG or other continuous neuromonitoring techniques to detect brain ischemia [8,9]. If the patient develops a new neurologic deficit, the surgeon or interventionalist can intervene to mitigate neurologic injury. However, sedation must be minimized so that the patient is able to give a reliable neurologic response. (See 'Local/regional anesthesia technique' below.)Advantages of general anesthesia — General anesthesia is more comfortable for the patient and may be favored if the preoperative assessment reveals anxiety, reluctance to be awake, inability to cooperate or communicate, neurocognitive dysfunction, or inability to lie supine comfortably (eg, congestive heart failure or severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease). In addition, use of general anesthesia at the outset avoids the need for urgent conversion from a local/regional to a general anesthetic technique. GENERAL ANESTHESIA TECHNIQUE — Carotid endarterectomy (CEA) and carotid artery stenting (CAS) are typically short procedures, lasting less than 90 minutes. Thus, short-acting medications are selected when general anesthesia is administered in order to facilitate a rapid anesthetic emergence and prompt awakening for participation in a neurologic exam [3].Induction and maintenance of general anesthesia●Induction — Induction of anesthesia should utilize a short-acting agent such as etomidate (0.2 to 0.3 mg/kg) or propofol (2 mg/kg), that is slowly injected and titrated for effect. The addition of a low-dose, short-acting opioid (eg, fentanyl [1 to 2 mcg/kg] or remifentanil [1 mcg/kg]) and/or lidocaine (50 to 100 mg) blunts the hypertension and tachycardia response associated with sympathetic stimulation during endotracheal intubation [11,12]. ●Maintenance — Anesthetic maintenance can be achieved utilizing either a volatile or intravenous anesthetic technique. Anesthetic agents are administered in low doses to minimize interference with the EEG and other neuromonitoring techniques [13,14].•Volatile anesthetic agents — When a volatile anesthetic is selected for carotid revascularization, we suggest desflurane or sevoflurane because the low solubility of these agents facilitates a more rapid emergence from anesthesia than isoflurane [15,16] or propofol infusion [17]. -If neuromonitoring is utilized during general anesthesia for a carotid intervention, then the volatile anesthetic should be administered at a dose that is <1.0 minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) to avoid signal suppression that can interfere with the detection of brain ischemia [18]. Similarly, changes in blood pressure should not be treated with adjustments in volatile anesthetic dose that may impact neuromonitoring [18]. (See 'Electroencephalography (EEG) in patients under general anesthesia' below.)•Intravenous anesthetic agents — Maintenance of general anesthesia using only intravenous anesthetic agents (eg, propofol and remifentanil in combination) is also a common practice for carotid interventions. Clinical studies demonstrate equivalence with volatile anesthetics for maintenance of general anesthesia, but no major advantages [19-21]. The use of volatile versus intravenous techniques (or their combination) is usually based on the preference and experience of the anesthesiologist.•Nitrous oxide — While nitrous oxide (N2O) can be used as an adjunct for general anesthesia in patients undergoing carotid revascularization, the following clinical issues have been raised [22-25]: -N2O significantly increases the risk of postoperative nausea and vomiting [26-28]. It is particularly important to avoid nausea and vomiting after CEA because retching may increase the risk of postoperative neck hematoma. If N2O is deemed essential to the anesthetic plan, then the risk of nausea and vomiting is reduced by limiting its total dose and use of nausea and vomiting prophylaxis [29].-Concerns about possible cardiac toxicity prompted subgroup analyses from randomized trials, including the General Anesthesia versus Local Anesthesia (GALA) trial [30,31]. These post hoc subgroup analyses failed to demonstrate any serious outcome risk from exposure to N2O.-Investigations of N2O use in animal models of cerebral ischemia have yielded conflicting evidence regarding possible exacerbation of ischemic injury, but investigations in humans have not identified a detrimental effect on either gross neurologic or cognitive function [23].Airway management — We generally prefer endotracheal intubation in patients undergoing CEA with general anesthesia because of limited access to the airway during this procedure. We use a laryngeal mask airway (LMA) for patients undergoing CAS with general anesthesia. ●An endotracheal tube secures the airway and enables reliable controlled mechanical ventilation throughout the procedure. However, placement of an endotracheal tube, as well as manipulation of the head during surgery in an intubated patient, may induce sympathetic stimulation and consequent tachycardia, hypertension, and myocardial ischemia in patients at high risk [6]. Furthermore, during anesthetic emergence and tracheal extubation, coughing and hypertension may cause suture line disruption, carotid hematoma, and life-threatening airway compression after CEA, or may cause femoral hematoma after CAS [32]. Hemodynamic lability during anesthetic emergence can be minimized by extubation under deep anesthesia, followed by gentle mask ventilation, which is continued until the return of full consciousness and adequate spontaneous ventilation. ●An LMA is an alternative airway management device for CEA or CAS. In comparison to endotracheal intubation, this technique has been associated with less hemodynamic lability during anesthetic induction and emergence, because the supraglottic position of the LMA minimizes tracheal irritation [33]. However, during CEA, there is a greater chance of dislodging an LMA than an endotracheal tube.Ventilation management — Normocapnia should be maintained during general anesthesia in patients undergoing CEA.●Permissive hypercapnia is avoided. While permissive hypercapnia, achieved by hypoventilating patients under general anesthesia, had been proposed as a method to increase cerebral blood flow and mitigate ischemia caused by cross-clamping the carotid [34], adverse reactions have been reported in patients who experienced intracerebral vascular “steal” during hypercapnia, due to increased blood flow to normally perfused brain tissue [35,36]. In addition, the cerebral vasodilation caused by hypercapnia may increase the risk of cerebral embolization. ●Hypocapnia is avoided because it increases cerebrovascular tone, thereby adversely decreasing cerebral blood flow.LOCAL/REGIONAL ANESTHESIA TECHNIQUE — Local/regional anesthesia is performed with or without a nerve block, and is usually supplemented with intravenous sedation to maintain patient comfort during the procedure. However, sedation is minimized in order to allow neurologic exams to be performed at frequent intervals during the procedure, as well as at the end of the procedure.The most commonly used nerve block techniques for carotid endarterectomy (CEA) are a superficial and/or deep cervical plexus block [3]. We prefer a superficial plexus block, since evidence suggests that this provides adequate anesthesia for CEA, while avoiding the complications of the deep plexus block (eg, subarachnoid injection, Horner syndrome, and unwanted blockade of the phrenic, recurrent laryngeal and vagus nerves) [3,37-39]. Also, an increased risk of urgent conversion to general anesthesia has been associated with deep plexus block as compared to superficial plexus block. (See 'Conversion from local/regional to general anesthesia' below.)We use dexmedetomidine (typically 1 mcg/kg initial loading dose, followed by an infusion at 0.3 mcg/kg per hour) to provide sedation in patients undergoing CEA or CAS with local/regional anesthesia. Although dexmedetomidine may theoretically decrease cerebral blood flow by inducing a degree of vasoconstriction within the brain [40], evidence suggests that it is safe and effective in this setting [41-43]. Although limited data suggest that the quality and duration of a cervical plexus block may be enhanced with addition of fentanyl or clonidine to the local anesthetic, we do not typically use these additives [44,45]. (See "Peripheral nerve block: Techniques".)CONVERSION FROM LOCAL/REGIONAL TO GENERAL ANESTHESIA — Indications for conversion from local/regional anesthesia to general anesthesia include patient request, severe agitation, or seizure. The need to convert is a relatively uncommon event, occurring in 4 percent of the patients in the General Anesthesia versus Local Anesthesia (GALA) trial [46]. In a systematic review, the risk of conversion to general anesthesia was significantly higher with deep compared to superficial cervical plexus block (odds ratio [OR] 5.35), possibly due to a higher risk of complications and/or inadequate analgesia with the deep plexus block [38]. (See 'Local/regional anesthesia technique' above.)Airway access may be compromised by an open incision for carotid endarterectomy (CEA) that is partially covered by surgical drapes on the head and neck. Thus, preoxygenation may not be possible. In such cases, a rapid intravenous induction allows the anesthesiologist to promptly secure the airway. An assistant or the surgeon may aid the anesthesiologist by allowing the head to return a neutral position and partially lifting the drape while maintaining surgical site sterility.For carotid artery stenting (CAS), the anesthesiologist has free access to the airway if conversion to general anesthesia becomes necessary. NEUROMONITORING — Neurologic injury from strokes associated with carotid endarterectomy (CEA) and carotid artery stenting (CAS) may be minimized if ischemia is detected in a timely fashion and treated promptly [47,48]. A variety of techniques to monitor cerebral perfusion and detect emboli have been suggested for carotid revascularization surgery.The gold standard for assessment of brain perfusion is the neurologic examination in an awake patient (ie, a patient receiving little or no sedation). When general anesthesia is used, a variety of neuromonitoring modalities are available; these are classified in the categories of brain activity monitoring, cerebral perfusion monitoring, and brain oxygen saturation monitoring. In CEA, neuromonitoring may detect cerebral ischemia due to hypoperfusion or emboli shortly after carotid clamping (eg, a change in mental status or new weakness in a awake patient or severe EEG changes in a patient under general anesthesia). In such cases, surgical placement of a carotid shunt is the usual treatment. (See "Carotid endarterectomy", section on 'Carotid shunting'.) In CAS procedures, neuromonitoring may detect cerebral ischemia due to carotid vasospasm or emboli. In such cases, the interventionalist is notified and cerebral angiography may then be performed to identify a potentially treatable condition. (See "Carotid artery stenting and its complications", section on 'Carotid artery stenting'.) Neurologic examination in awake patients — A baseline assessment is performed at the beginning of the procedure and repeated every 10 to 15 minutes during carotid dissection, immediately prior to carotid clamping, and continuously during carotid clamping. This assessment consists of noting the answers to simple questions directed to the patient, and asking him to squeeze a team member’s hand or a noise-making toy to ensure that contralateral handgrip strength is normal [8,9,49]. Agitation, slurred speech, disorientation, and extremity weakness indicate possible cerebral ischemia.Electroencephalography (EEG) in patients under general anesthesia — The aim of brain activity monitoring is to detect decreased perfusion due to carotid artery clamping or embolism. Brain activity is typically monitored by continuous electroencephalography (EEG). EEG monitoring is most commonly used for neurologic assessment in patients undergoing CEA with general anesthesia [50-52]. A meta-analysis of 4664 measurements from 29 studies examined the ability of various monitors to detect cerebral ischemia during CEA performed in awake patients, using clinical neurological assessment as the ideal comparison [53]. The cerebral monitors that were analyzed included EEG, SSEPs, stump pressure, transcranial Doppler (TCD), cerebral oximetry, jugular venous bulb saturation, and jugular venous lactate levels. The best predictor of cerebral ischemia was a combination of a low stump pressure and EEG (or TCD) indicators. EEG monitoring is initiated prior to induction of anesthesia. Because anesthetic agents may impact the EEG recording, the American Society of Neurophysiological Monitoring recommends a baseline EEG prior to induction of anesthesia. After induction, a second baseline EEG is obtained under general anesthesia before any carotid manipulation has occurred [18]. Subsequently, EEG waveforms obtained from scalp electrodes in multi-channel sets are continuously evaluated throughout the procedure by trained neuromonitoring personnel [18,51]. These personnel will modify aspects of the EEG monitoring technique according to the anesthetic regimen, in an attempt to optimize detection of signal changes that may indicate cerebral ischemia [54]. Continuous communication between the anesthesiologist and the neuromonitoring team is necessary to minimize anesthetic interference with the neuromonitoring goals for an individual patient.Changes in EEG related to ischemia may be classified as mild, moderate, or severe [51]. Severe changes (ie, a greater than 50 percent decrease in waveform amplitude in a generalized or lateralized distribution) indicate a need for safe augmentation of the systemic blood pressure by the anesthesiologist or insertion of a shunt by the surgeon.Limitations of EEG monitoring include the inability to monitor subcortical structures, difficulties with interpretation, and limited sensitivity [20]. Unprocessed EEG monitoring is preferred over processed EEG (eg, bispectral index [BIS]) for monitoring during carotid revascularization. Processed EEG has limited ability to detect cerebral ischemia because only the frontal cortex is monitored [55]. Use of processed EEG for monitoring depth of anesthesia is discussed separately. (See "Awareness with recall following general anesthesia", section on 'Brain monitoring'.) Other neuromonitoring modalities — The EEG is the most commonly used neuromonitor, but other techniques are used according to available expertise and physician preference. ●Cerebral perfusion monitoring — Measurement of internal carotid artery stump pressure can be used to assess cerebral perfusion during CEA. Transcranial Doppler may be used during either CEA or CAS.•Carotid stump pressure — Carotid stump pressure obtained during CEA is less commonly used than in the past. One reason is that only a single pressure is obtained after initial clamping of the carotid arteries, rather than continuous pressure monitoring. However, in one meta-analysis, the combination of EEG monitoring (or TCD monitoring) with carotid stump pressure appeared to be the best combined predictive technique for cerebral ischemia monitoring [53]. •Transcranial Doppler (TCD) — Transcranial Doppler (TCD) utilizes pulsed wave Doppler to measure blood velocities in the middle cerebral artery. The sensitivity and specificity of this technique is unreliable for detection of cerebral ischemia, since changes in blood flow velocity may reflect changes in arterial diameter rather than blood flow changes.However, specialized TCD techniques can provide a reliable method to detect and quantify emboli [56]. A higher embolic burden detected by TCD correlates with increased stroke risk [57-59]. In addition, the instantaneous audio feedback that occurs with embolization may guide surgical manipulation of the carotid artery [60,61]. However, the use of this technique has not been associated with improved outcomes.A disadvantage of TCD is the position of the probes, which may interfere with the surgeon’s access to the patient’s neck as well as the anesthesiologist’s access to the patients’ airway.●Brain oxygen saturation monitoring — Modalities for monitoring brain oxygen saturation during CEA or CAS include jugular venous bulb monitoring and cerebral oximetry. •Jugular venous bulb monitoring — Jugular venous oxygen saturation (SjVO2) in blood returning from the cerebral circulation is sampled via a catheter inserted into the internal jugular vein ipsilateral to the carotid surgical site. In a modification of this technique, jugular venous lactate levels are followed as a surrogate marker for developing brain ischemia.A major limitation of monitoring SjVO2 is that it is a global rather than a regional monitor of ischemia, due to intracranial mixing of cerebral venous blood. Furthermore, there is a wide range of normal SjVO2 values (55 to 75 percent) due to inter-individual variability, as well as possible extracerebral blood sample contamination. Currently, there is no evidence to suggest benefit of jugular venous bulb monitoring in the setting of CEA or CAS [62].•Cerebral oximetry — Cerebral oximetry utilizes near-infrared spectroscopy to detect cerebral oxygen saturation via an adhesive pad applied to the forehead [63,64]. In carotid revascularization surgery, limitations include wide variation in baseline readings and lack of agreement about the threshold that would indicate the need for shunt placement [64,65]. Furthermore, since cerebral oximetry monitors oxygenation saturation in a small area of the frontal lobe cortex, its sensitivity may be limited by this small sampling window.●Somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs) —Somatosensory evoked potential (SSEP) monitoring is rarely used for neuromonitoring during CEA. Results from studies of the sensitivity of SSEP monitoring for detection of cerebral ischemia are not consistent [66-68]. A meta-analysis of 15 studies including a total of 3136 patients concluded that isolated SSEP monitoring poorly predicts perioperative neurologic deficits [69]. HEMODYNAMIC MONITORING AND MANAGEMENTExpected hemodynamic changes — Both carotid endarterectomy (CEA) and carotid artery stenting (CAS) may be associated with extreme lability of both blood pressure and heart rate in the perioperative period, in part due to altered baseline carotid baroreceptor function and intraoperative manipulation of these baroreceptors [70]. (See "Carotid endarterectomy" and "Carotid artery stenting and its complications".)The intraoperative periods of highest risk for hemodynamic instability and resultant myocardial or cerebral ischemia are:●Induction of anesthesia•Anesthetic agents used for induction may cause hypotension by removing sympathetic tone, directly decreasing systemic vascular resistance, directly depressing the myocardium, reducing venous return, or inducing bradycardia.•Endotracheal intubation may induce sympathetic stimulation resulting in tachycardia and hypertension.●Surgical manipulation of the carotid sinus and carotid artery•Carotid endarterectomy (CEA) — Surgical manipulation of the carotid sinus during carotid dissection may result in sympathetic stimulation and resultant hypertension and tachycardia or may increase parasympathetic outflow with resultant bradycardia and hypotension. While injection of local anesthetic, either into the carotid body [71,72] or into the periadventitial area around the carotid sinus [73], has been proposed as a method to minimize the bradycardic reflex and reduce hemodynamic lability due to carotid manipulation, there is insufficient data to endorse this practice.Carotid cross-clamping may precipitate ipsilateral cerebral ischemia due to mechanisms such as decreased carotid blood flow and/or plaque disruption with cerebral embolization. Thus, during cross-clamping, systolic blood pressure should be maintained in a range from the patient’s baseline blood pressure to 20 percent above that baseline, in order to optimize collateral cerebral perfusion [8,9]. We prefer to use systolic arterial blood pressure to achieve this goal, although some clinicians prefer to use the mean arterial pressure.Incision of the carotid artery exposes the baroreceptors in the carotid sinus to atmospheric pressure, which increases sympathetic discharge from the medulla, and may result in vasoconstriction and increased heart rate [74].Carotid unclamping and the ensuing period of reperfusion may be complicated by hypotension [9].•Carotid artery stenting (CAS) — Balloon expansion during carotid artery stenting and the resultant endovascular pressure on the baroreceptors reduces sympathetic activity and increases parasympathetic outflow, which may cause bradycardia and hypotension [75]. This usually resolves with administration of atropine (0.2 to 0.4 mg increments). ●Emergence from anesthesia•Tracheal irritation immediately before and during extubation may cause coughing and severe hypertension.Hemodynamic monitoring●Electrocardiography (ECG) — Continuous ECG monitoring is necessary to detect arrhythmias and/or myocardial ischemia. Depression of the ST-segment >1 mm may indicate myocardial ischemia, prompting interventions to improve myocardial oxygen supply and/or reduce myocardial oxygen demand (eg, raising diastolic blood pressure or decreasing heart rate) [76,77]. Initial interventions may include metoprolol 2.5 to 5 mg to reduce heart rate or a phenylephrine bolus of 100 to 200 micrograms to increase diastolic blood pressure. If evidence of ischemia persists, further management includes establishing hemodynamic stability with vasoactive medications and consultation with cardiology.Computerized ST-segment trending is superior to visual clinical interpretation for identification of ST-segment changes, and multiple-lead monitoring is more sensitive than single-lead monitoring [6,78,79]. Despite limitations in the sensitivity of ECG monitoring, the presence of intraoperative and postoperative ST-segment changes is associated with cardiac morbidity and mortality in patients at high risk for myocardial ischemia during noncardiac surgery [6].●Intra-arterial catheter — Invasive arterial blood pressure measurement should be used to monitor moment-to-moment changes, in order to rapidly detect and treat hypotension or hypertension. The Australian Incident Monitoring Study established the superiority of direct arterial blood pressure monitoring over indirect monitoring techniques for the early detection of intraoperative hypotension [80]. (See 'Hemodynamic management' below.) Also, an intra-arterial catheter is useful to guide management of vasoactive drugs (ie, vasopressors and vasodilators) and facilitates arterial access for blood gas measurements.The intra-arterial catheter is inserted prior to induction of anesthesia. Patients with carotid disease usually have systemic atherosclerotic disease, which can result in blood pressure differences between the arms [81]. To determine which arm is ideal for radial or brachial arterial cannulation, the blood pressure in each arm is checked with a cuff. The arm with the highest blood pressure should be selected for arterial cannulation. If blood pressure obtained by cuff is suspiciously low in both arms, the blood pressure in the legs is checked, and femoral arterial cannulation may be selected.●Central venous catheterization — Central venous or pulmonary artery pressure monitoring is rarely indicated during carotid interventions [82].Hemodynamic management — Blood pressure is controlled throughout the procedure and postoperative period. During cross-clamping, systolic blood pressure should be maintained in a range from the patient’s baseline blood pressure to 20 percent above that baseline, in order to optimize collateral cerebral perfusion [8,9]. This is necessary, even if a shunt is used. ●Vasoactive drugs— The anesthesiologist should have sympathomimetic, vasodilator, and short-acting beta blockers medications readily available throughout the perioperative period in order to rapidly treat hypertension, hypotension, and tachy- or bradyarrhythmias. We suggest that bolus doses of the following drugs be immediately available: phenylephrine (eg, 100 mcg/mL injected as 100 to 200 mcg boluses), ephedrine (eg, 5 to 10 mg/mL injected as 5 to 20 mg boluses), vasopressin (eg, 1 Unit/mL injected as 1 Unit boluses), nicardipine (eg, 100 mcg/mL injected as 100 to 500 mcg boluses), labetalol (eg, 5 to 10 mg/mL injected as 5 to 20 mg boluses), esmolol (10 mg/mL injected as 10 to 50 mg boluses), and atropine (0.4 mg/mL injected as 0.2 to 0.4 mg boluses).In addition, infusion solutions of phenylephrine (10 to 200 mcg/minute; 0.1 to 2 mcg/kg per minute) and nitroglycerin (10 to 400 mcg/minute; 0.1 to 4 mcg/kg per minute) should be prepared and immediately available to administer. ●Fluids — While a bolus of fluids may help achieve normovolemia and normotension, carotid surgery is not usually associated with excessive fluid loss or fluid extravasation. Thus, volume resuscitation with large amounts of fluid is rarely required.ANTICOAGULATION MANAGEMENT — Anticoagulation during the course of carotid endarterectomy (CEA) or carotid artery stenting (CAS) is recommended and discussed in detail in separate topic reviews. (See "Carotid endarterectomy" and "Carotid artery stenting and its complications".)During CEA, a bolus of intravenous heparin is administered before clamping the carotid artery. The anesthesiologist is generally not required to monitor the activated clotting time (ACT) due to the short duration of carotid clamping [83]. At the completion of a CEA procedure, reversal of heparin with protamine is suggested, in order to decrease the incidence of serious bleeding. The anesthesiologist should always administer protamine slowly, while monitoring for an adverse reaction (eg, hypotension due to histamine-induced vasodilation or a more severe anaphylactic reaction) [84,85]. (See "Carotid endarterectomy", section on 'Endarterectomy procedure'.)During CAS, heparin is administered prior to advancing wires into the carotid artery in order to prevent thrombosis. The ACT should be confirmed to be between 250 and 300 seconds before manipulation of the carotid artery, and it is maintained at this level until all wires and cerebral protection devices have been removed. Heparin is not reversed after CAS. (See "Carotid artery stenting and its complications", section on 'Anticoagulation'.)POSTOPERATIVE PROBLEMSBlood pressure control — In the postoperative period, the disrupted baroreceptor function caused during carotid endarterectomy (CEA) or carotid artery stenting (CAS) may result in ongoing labile blood pressure and heart rate [75,86]. Also, uncontrolled postoperative pain may cause hypertension. Continued invasive monitoring of arterial blood pressure, as well as treatment with appropriate administration of pain medications and vasoactive drugs, is necessary in patients exhibiting hemodynamic instability. ●Hypertension — Postoperative hypertension may result in abnormally increased cerebral blood flow because cerebral autoregulation may be disrupted following CEA or CAS. Thus, it is important to strictly control postoperative hypertension, maintaining systolic blood pressure at 100 to 150 mmHg. Labetalol (5 to 10 mg every 5 minutes), nicardipine (100 to 500 mcg), or esmolol (10 to 50 mg) may be administered in bolus doses. If blood pressure is not controlled with one or more or these bolused medications, intravenous infusion of labetalol (0.5 to 2 mg/minute), nitroprusside (10 to 400 mcg/minute; 0.1 to 4.0 mcg/kg per minute), nitroglycerin (10 to 400 mcg/minute; 0.1 to 4 mcg/kg per minute), nicardipine (initial dose of 3 to 6 mg/hour titrated to a maximum dose of 15 mg/hour), or esmolol (50 to 300 mcg/kg/minute) is administered to control hypertension. Occasionally, postoperative hypertension is a predecessor of a condition known as cerebral hyperperfusion syndrome [87]. This syndrome is characterized by cerebral edema, petechial or frank intracerebral hemorrhage, and seizures. (See "Complications of carotid endarterectomy", section on 'Hyperperfusion syndrome'.)●Hypotension — Persistent hypotension may complicate the early postoperative course due to residual carotid hypersensitivity after plaque excision.Systolic blood pressure should be maintained at 100 to 150 mmHg to provide adequate cerebral perfusion pressure and cerebral blood flow, and thus avoid cerebral ischemia. If necessary, an infusion of phenylephrine (10 to 200 mcg/minute; 0.1 to 2 mcg/kg per minute) is administered.Slow emergence from anesthesia and stroke — Slow emergence from general anesthesia may be related to residual anesthetic effects, hypothermia, or hypercarbia. These causes are ruled out, and stroke is considered by evaluating the patient for new neurologic deficits. (See "Complications of carotid endarterectomy", section on 'Perioperative stroke'.)Hematoma — Postoperative bleeding resulting in neck hematoma occasionally occurs after CEA and is more likely when anticoagulation is not promptly reversed or in patients with poorly-controlled postoperative hypertension [88,89].    A significant wound hematoma may compromise the patient’s airway, resulting in a need for emergency reintubation and reoperation. This event is associated with higher in-hospital mortality, stroke, and myocardial infarction [89,90]. (See "Complications of carotid endarterectomy", section on 'Cervical hematoma'.)Following CAS, inadequate closure of the femoral artery puncture site used to obtain percutaneous access may lead to bleeding and hematoma, in part because of concomitant administration of antiplatelet therapy and intraoperative anticoagulation. (See "Carotid artery stenting and its complications", section on 'Bleeding/Hematoma/Pseudoaneurysm'.)Pain — While opioids effectively treat pain, they may exacerbate respiratory depression, particularly after carotid interventions, due to disruption of the carotid chemoreceptor-mediated hyperventilation response to hypoxia [91,92]. Thus, judicious administration of opioids is necessary to minimize the side effects of respiratory depression and somnolence. Acetaminophen may be added to decrease opioid requirements. The safety of NSAIDs for pain control has not been established for patients undergoing carotid revascularization and we suggest avoiding their use. (See "Nonselective NSAIDs: Adverse cardiovascular effects" and "COX-2 selective inhibitors: Adverse cardiovascular effects".)Vocal cord paralysis — Injury to the recurrent laryngeal nerve or compression from edema may result in paralysis of the ipsilateral vocal cord. This typically presents as new-onset hoarseness. In rare cases, bilateral recurrent laryngeal nerve injury may occur due to contralateral recurrent laryngeal nerve damage during previous CEA surgery. In such cases, emergent endotracheal intubation is required because the unopposed adduction of the vocal cords causes closure of the glottic aperture and laryngeal obstruction. Other nerve injuries that can result from CEA are discussed separately. (See "Complications of carotid endarterectomy", section on 'Nerve injury'.)Other complications — Other complications occurring in the immediate postoperative period, or several days and weeks later, are discussed separately. (See "Complications of carotid endarterectomy" and "Carotid artery stenting and its complications", section on 'Complications'.)SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS●Preanesthesia consultation for carotid artery procedures (ie, carotid endarterectomy [CEA] and carotid artery stenting [CAS]) identifies patients with cardiovascular comorbidity who may require further investigation. (See 'Preanesthesia consultation' above.)●Perioperative medication management includes continuing beta blockers, and continuing and/or initiating statins and antiplatelet agents in selected patients. Specific recommendations are discussed separately. (See "Carotid endarterectomy", section on 'Medication management'.) ●The choice of general anesthesia versus local/regional anesthesia in an awake patient for CEA or CAS is determined by the preferences of the surgeon, anesthesiologist, and patient. Although major outcomes (death, stroke and myocardial infarction) are not impacted by anesthetic choice, length of hospital stay and secondary outcomes (eg, hemodynamic instability, delirium) may be reduced in patients receiving local/regional rather than general anesthesia. (See 'Choice of anesthesia' above.)•A major advantage of local/regional anesthetic technique is the ability to continuously monitor neurologic function in an awake patient. However, this requires that the patient can cooperate and communicate well. (See 'Advantages of local/regional anesthesia' above.)•Advantages of general anesthesia include greater patient comfort and elimination of the potential need for urgent conversion from a local/regional anesthetic technique. (See 'Advantages of general anesthesia' above.)●General anesthesia for CEA or CAS is induced with a short-acting agent such as etomidate (0.3 mg/kg) or propofol (2 mg/kg). The addition of a low-dose, short-acting opioid (eg, fentanyl [1 to 2 mcg/kg] or remifentanil [1 mcg/kg]), and/or lidocaine (50 to 100 mg) blunts the hypertension and tachycardia response associated with sympathetic stimulation during endotracheal intubation. When volatile anesthetics are used to maintain anesthesia, selection of sevoflurane or desflurane facilitates a rapid emergence. (See 'Induction and maintenance of general anesthesia' above.)●The authors prefer endotracheal intubation in patients undergoing CEA with general anesthesia because airway access is limited during this procedure. In patients undergoing CAS with general anesthesia, a laryngeal mask airway (LMA) is preferred. (See 'Airway management' above.)●Normocapnia is maintained during general anesthesia in patients undergoing CEA or CAS. (See 'Ventilation management' above.)●When local/regional anesthetic technique is selected for CEA, we recommend a superficial cervical plexus block; this technique provides adequate anesthesia while avoiding the complications of a deep plexus block (Grade 1B).For CAS, local/regional anesthetic is injected into the catheter insertion site. Sedation is minimized to allow performance of neurologic exams. (See 'Local/regional anesthesia technique' above.)●In awake patients, neuromonitoring is accomplished by frequent neurologic examination. (See 'Neurologic examination in awake patients' above.)●When general anesthesia is selected, neuromonitoring techniques to detect cerebral ischemia include continuous electroencephalography (EEG) for CEA or CAS and/or carotid stump pressure monitoring for CEA. EEG signal suppression is avoided by administering the volatile anesthetic at a dose <1.0 minimum alveolar concentration (MAC). (See 'Neuromonitoring' above and 'Electroencephalography (EEG) in patients under general anesthesia' above.)●Blood pressure is controlled throughout the procedure, using vasoactive drugs as needed. Periods of highest risk for hemodynamic instability and resultant myocardial or cerebral ischemia include induction of general anesthesia, surgical manipulation of the carotid sinus and carotid artery, carotid cross-clamping, incision of the carotid artery, carotid unclamping with reperfusion, and emergence from anesthesia. During carotid cross-clamping, we suggest maintenance of systolic blood pressure in a range from the patient’s baseline blood pressure to 20 percent above that baseline to optimize collateral cerebral perfusion (Grade 2C). (See 'Hemodynamic management' above.) ●During CEA, the patient is systemically anticoagulated prior to carotid artery clamping. At the completion of the procedure, we suggest reversal of heparin with protamine rather than no reversal (Grade 2B). (See "Carotid endarterectomy", section on 'Endarterectomy procedure'.)●During CAS, the patient is anticoagulated with heparin to maintain the activated clotting time (ACT) at 250 to 300 seconds, prior to any manipulation of guidewires and catheters within the carotid artery. (See "Carotid artery stenting and its complications", section on 'Anticoagulation'.)●Problems in the immediate postoperative period requiring urgent treatment include hypertension, hypotension, slow emergence from anesthesia, stroke, hematoma at the surgical site, pain, and vocal cord paralysis. (See 'Postoperative problems' above.) 
		
