
			INTRODUCTION — Rupture of an atherosclerotic plaque is the usual initiating event in an acute coronary syndrome (ACS). Persistent thrombotic occlusion at the site of plaque rupture results in acute myocardial infarction. (See "The role of the vulnerable plaque in acute coronary syndromes".) Thrombin activity at the site of plaque rupture may result in delayed or incomplete reperfusion of occluded vessels and contributes to reocclusion. Thrombin is a central mediator of clot formation through its activation of platelets, conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin, and activation of factor XIII, leading to fibrin cross-linking and clot stabilization. Anticoagulants, including heparins, direct thrombin inhibitors, and fondaparinux interfere with the activity of thrombin. (See "Overview of hemostasis".)This topic will review the evidence that supports the use of parenteral anticoagulant therapy in all patients with an acute non-ST elevation coronary syndrome (NSTEACS), which includes both unstable angina and acute non-ST elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI), and will provide recommendations for its use according to whether the patient receives reperfusion with percutaneous coronary intervention or no reperfusion therapy. Information regarding anticoagulant agents in ST elevation myocardial infarction and the role of antiplatelet therapy in NSTEACS is found elsewhere. (See "Anticoagulant therapy in acute ST elevation myocardial infarction" and "Antiplatelet agents in acute non-ST elevation acute coronary syndromes".)CLASSIFICATION OF ANTICOAGULANT AGENTS — There are three classes of anticoagulants that have been evaluated in the management of acute coronary syndromes: ●The heparins, including unfractionated heparin (UFH) and the low molecular weight heparins (LMWH), are indirect thrombin inhibitors that complex with antithrombin (AT, formerly known as AT III) and convert AT from a slow to a rapid inactivator of thrombin, factor Xa, and to a lesser extent, factors XIIa, XIa, and IXa. (See "Overview of hemostasis" and "Therapeutic use of heparin and low molecular weight heparin".)There are a number of intrinsic limitations to UFH therapy in patients with acute MI. The most important is that the heparin-antithrombin (AT, formerly called antithrombin III) complex cannot bind or inactivate thrombin bound within a clot [1]. Such clot-bound thrombin acts as an important thrombogenic stimulus at a site of coronary thrombosis, particularly after clot disruption by fibrinolytic agents [2]. An additional concern with the administration of UFH has been heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT). The risk is much lower but not absent with LMWH than with UFH and is not seen with the direct thrombin inhibitors or fondaparinux. (See "Anticoagulant therapy in acute ST elevation myocardial infarction", section on 'Classification of anticoagulant agents'.)LMWH inactivates factor Xa, like UFH, but has a lesser effect on thrombin (figure 1). As a result, LMWH do not prolong the aPTT in a predictable fashion. They have a number of advantages over UFH, including a more predictable anticoagulant effect and a reduced likelihood of inducing immune-mediated thrombocytopenia. ●The direct thrombin inhibitors (eg, hirudin, bivalirudin, lepirudin) bind to and inactivate one or more of the active sites on the thrombin molecule [3]. (See "Anticoagulation with direct thrombin inhibitors and direct factor Xa inhibitors", section on 'Direct thrombin inhibitors'.)The prototypic agent of this class, hirudin, is a peptide derived from the saliva of the medicinal leech. Hirudin selectively binds to and inhibits both the fibrinogen recognition and catalytic sites of thrombin. Peptide analogues of hirudin include bivalirudin (previously called hirulog), which also binds to the substrate recognition and catalytic sites of thrombin [4], and the arginine derivative argatroban, which competitively inhibits the thrombin catalytic site. These drugs share a number of the following properties that make them attractive as potential therapeutic agents compared to UFH:•Antithrombin is not required as a cofactor.•Clot-bound thrombin can be inhibited.•Circulating inhibitors do not inhibit their function.•There is no appreciable binding to plasma proteins. •There is no activation of platelets and, in contrast, these drugs inhibit thrombin-mediated platelet activation. •Thrombin bound to fibrin derivatives is susceptible to inactivation by direct thrombin inhibitors, but is protected from inhibition by heparin [2]. This may be particularly important after fibrinolysis, when there is a procoagulant state.●The synthetic heparin pentasaccharide fondaparinux acts through antithrombin to exclusively neutralize factor Xa. (See "Therapeutic use of fondaparinux".)ANTICOAGULANT VERSUS PLACEBO — We recommend anticoagulant therapy for all patients with non-ST elevation ACS. This is based on studies with UFH and dalteparin (an LMWH), which found that anticoagulant therapy is superior to no anticoagulant therapy in these patients. ●A pooled analysis of 10 small trials of patients with non-ST elevation ACS demonstrated a significant short-term (seven days) reduction in death or MI with either UFH or LMWH plus aspirin compared to aspirin alone (summary odds ratio 0.53, 95% CI 0.38-0.73) [5]. Subgroup analysis based on the presence or absence of myocardial infarction was not reported.●The FRISC trial evaluated 1506 patients who were randomly assigned to either placebo or dalteparin [6]. The rate of death or new MI was significantly lower in patients treated with dalteparin (1.8 versus 4.8 percent) and there was a reduced frequency of the need for revascularization. No large trials comparing direct thrombin inhibitors or fondaparinux to placebo have been performed.HEPARINS — The evidence provided in the section above confirms a benefit from anticoagulant therapy with either unfractionated heparin (UFH) or a LMWH compared to placebo. A number of trials have compared an LMWH, usually enoxaparin, to unfractionated heparin in patients with unstable angina or NSTEMI and found that enoxaparin leads to better outcomes in patients managed with a conservative strategy (medical therapy), whereas other LMWHs have generally not been found to be superior to UFH in this setting.Enoxaparin versus UFH — The efficacy of enoxaparin, compared to UFH, has been evaluated in four large randomized trials. In these trials, the usual dose of enoxaparin was 1 mg/kg every 12 hours and for UFH was 60 U/kg initial bolus, followed by an infusion of 12 U/kg per hour (adjusted to a goal activated partial thromboplastin time [aPTT] of 1.5 to 2.0 times the upper limit of normal or 50 to 70 seconds). Treatment was generally started soon after the diagnosis and continued for two and eight days, unless otherwise noted. The following four trials had differing populations and co-interventions: ●The ESSENCE trial compared the effectiveness enoxaparin to continuous intravenous UFH in 3171 aspirin treated patients with unstable angina (angina at rest) or acute NSTEMI; therapy was given for a minimum of 48 hours to a maximum of eight days [7]. Revascularization was not intended in this trial. At 30 days, enoxaparin therapy had a significant lower rate of a combined end point of death, MI, and recurrent angina (19.8 versus 23.3 percent with UFH) or a revascularization procedure (27.0 versus 32.2 percent). There was no difference between the two groups in the rates of major bleeding (6.5 versus 7.0 percent) or severe thrombocytopenia (0.4 versus 0.6 percent) [8]. These benefits were maintained at one year for both the combined end point (32 versus 36 percent) and the need for repeat revascularization (36 versus 41 percent) [9]. Approximately one-third of patients underwent percutaneous coronary revascularization or coronary artery bypass graft surgery.●The benefits of enoxaparin compared to UFH in UA or NSTEMI were confirmed in the TIMI 11B trial of 3910 aspirin treated patients for whom revascularization was not intended [10]. The incidence of the primary end point (death, MI, or urgent revascularization) was significantly lower with enoxaparin at eight days (12.4 versus 14.5 for heparin). The benefit of enoxaparin was limited to patients with elevated levels of troponin I [11].●In Phase A of the A to Z trial, 3987 patients with a non-ST elevation ACS (74 percent NSTEMI) were treated with tirofiban and aspirin and then randomly assigned to enoxaparin or UFH [12]. An early invasive strategy was declared in 55 percent of the study subjects, at the discretion of the physician. The following findings were noted:•At seven days, there was no significant difference in the incidence of the primary end point (death, MI, or refractory ischemia) between the enoxaparin and UFH arms (8.4 versus 9.4 percent, respectively; hazard ratio 0.88; 95% CI 0.71-1.08). These findings met the prespecified criteria for non-inferiority and, although not significant, the 1 percent absolute reduction in the primary end point was consistent with the findings in the above trials performed without GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors. •An analysis of prespecified subgroups found no difference in outcome in the 55 percent of patients treated with an intended early invasive strategy (8.8 versus 8.5 percent). In contrast, there was a significant reduction in the primary end point with enoxaparin (7.7 versus 10.6 percent) in the remaining patients who were treated with an intended early conservative strategy.•The incidence of major bleeding was greater with enoxaparin (0.9 versus 0.4 percent with UFH; p = .05), but there was no increase in transfusion rates. ●Most patients with non-ST ACS are treated with dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin plus a platelet P2Y12 receptor antagonist or GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor) in addition to anticoagulant. Thus, the three trials presented above are not directly applicable to current care. (See "Antiplatelet agents in acute non-ST elevation acute coronary syndromes", section on 'Summary and recommendations'.)The SYNERGY trial provides the best evidence with which to compare UFH to enoxaparin in patients who receive contemporary antiplatelet therapy [13,14]. This trial randomly assigned 10,027 patients with a non-ST elevation ACS for whom an early invasive management strategy was planned to open label enoxaparin or UFH. Concomitant medications in SYNERGY included aspirin (95 percent), clopidogrel or ticlopidine (66 percent), and a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor (57 percent). Coronary angiography was performed in 92 percent of the SYNERGY patients; 47 percent underwent PCI and 19 percent underwent surgical revascularization. In many patients, anticoagulant therapy was stopped after PCI.The following findings were noted:•There was no significant difference in the rate of the primary end point of death or nonfatal MI at 30 days or at six months with enoxaparin (14.0 versus 14.5 percent and 17.6 versus 17.8 percent, enoxaparin compared to UFH). There was also no difference in death or nonfatal MI or in all-cause mortality at one year (7.4 versus 7.8 percent).•There was a significant increase in in-hospital major bleeding with enoxaparin (9.1 versus 7.6 percent for UFH). •Both cardiovascular and bleeding outcomes were worse in patients initially treated with either enoxaparin or UFH and then switched to the other agent compared to patients who did not switch. The results from SYNERGY suggest that, in patients with a non-ST elevation ACS who receive an oral platelet P2Y12 receptor blocker and aspirin (and a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor in some cases) and undergo PCI, enoxaparin and UFH have comparable efficacy. However, enoxaparin is associated with a significant increase in major bleeding.A 2012 meta-analysis comparing enoxaparin to UFH included studies of patients with ST- and non-ST elevation ACS and stable angina and evaluated outcomes of mortality and major bleeding [15]. Although there were trends toward lower rates of death and major bleeding with enoxaparin, we do not feel this meta-analysis should be used in the formulation of our recommendations due to the inclusion of STEMI patients and many stable patients, as well as other limitations. (See "Anticoagulant therapy in acute ST elevation myocardial infarction", section on 'UFH compared to enoxaparin'.)Other LMWHs — Other LMWHs, including nadroparin, tinzaparin, and dalteparin have been compared to placebo, UFH, or enoxaparin. These drugs appear to have equivalent efficacy to UFH, may be less effective than enoxaparin, and may be associated with higher rates of major bleeding.Nadroparin — In the FRAXIS trial of over 2300 patients with a non-ST elevation ACS, nadroparin was compared to intravenous UFH, both given for six days given for either six or fourteen days [16]. There was no advantage to nadroparin compared to UFH in the incidence of the primary end point (cardiac death, MI, refractory angina, or recurrence of unstable angina at day 14). Furthermore, there was a significantly increased risk of major hemorrhage among those receiving nadroparin for 14 days (3.5 versus 1.6 percent for UFH).Tinzaparin — Enoxaparin and tinzaparin given for seven days were directly compared in the EVET trial of 438 patients with a non-ST elevation ACS [17]. Enoxaparin therapy was associated with a significantly greater reduction in the recurrence of unstable angina at seven days (11.8 versus 19.3 percent) and the incidence at 30 days of recurrent angina (17.3 versus 26.1 percent) or MI (0.5 versus 2.8 percent). The benefit persisted at six months, as the enoxaparin group had significantly lower rates of death, MI, or recurrent angina (26 versus 44 percent) and death or MI (2.7 versus 6.9 percent) [18].Dalteparin — The efficacy of longer-term therapy with dalteparin was evaluated in two trials: in FRIC, in which patients received either dalteparin or placebo for 45 days after six days of dalteparin or UFH; and in FRISC II, in which patients received dalteparin acutely and then dalteparin or placebo for three months [19,20]. There was no benefit of prolonged therapy in FRIC, which also failed to demonstrate better outcomes with dalteparin than with heparin. FRISC II found no difference in death or MI at three or six months. There was a reduction in the combined end point of death, MI, or revascularization at three months, but not at six months. However, there was an increased incidence of intracranial hemorrhage with dalteparin (5 versus 0 with placebo). Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia — The incidence of immune-mediated heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) is approximately 2.5 to 3.0 percent in patients exposed to UFH for more than four days [21]. The incidence is much lower in patients treated with UFH for less than four days (0.2 percent) and in those treated with LMWH (0.2 versus 2.6 percent with UFH in a meta-analysis of studies that mostly consisted of patients who had undergone orthopedic surgery) [21]. (See "Management of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia".)Based upon these observations, we suggest that the platelet count be measured serially in patients treated with UFH. In patients with a history of HIT, or in whom HIT develops or is suspected while on UFH therapy, the preferred anticoagulant is bivalirudin. (See "Management of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia" and 'Bivalirudin' below.)Heparins summary — Enoxaparin and UFH appear to be of equal efficacy when patients with UA and NSTEMI are evaluated in the aggregate. However, patients who are managed by a conservative strategy (ESSENCE, TIMI 11B, and Phase A of the A to Z trials) appear to have fewer adverse cardiovascular events when treated with enoxaparin compared to UFH. In addition, enoxaparin is easier to administer (subcutaneous as opposed the intravenous route with UFH) and requires no laboratory monitoring.On the other hand, for patients undergoing an early invasive strategy, UFH may be preferable in patients at high bleeding risk due to the increased risk of bleeding (table 1) with enoxaparin seen in the SYNERGY trial. There is no evidence to support the use of other LMWHs in preference to enoxaparin.DIRECT THROMBIN INHIBITORS — The efficacy and safety of the direct thrombin inhibitors (argatroban, inogatran, efegatran, hirudin, and bivalirudin [Hirulog]), have been evaluated in trials of patients with non-ST elevation ACS. A meta-analysis of early trials found a significantly lower risk of death or MI at 30 days with direct thrombin inhibitors compared to heparin (7.4 versus 8.2 percent with unfractionated heparin [UFH], odds ratio 0.91, 95% CI 0.84-0.99), which was primarily due to a reduction in MI [22]. The treatment benefit was seen with hirudin and bivalirudin, but not with inogatran or argatroban. The better outcome was significant only in patients who underwent early PCI [23]. Compared to UFH, the risk of major bleeding (table 1) was increased with hirudin and reduced with bivalirudin; there was no difference in intracranial hemorrhage. Bivalirudin — The efficacy of bivalirudin, a synthetic congener of hirudin, was initially evaluated in trials of patients with unstable angina (TIMI 7 trial and the Bivalirudin Angioplasty Study, both of which were included in the meta-analysis discussed directly above) [24,25]. A majority of patients enrolled in these early trials did not receive either glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa inhibitors or a platelet P2Y12 receptor blocker such as clopidogrel. The efficacy and safety of bivalirudin (alone or with a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor) compared to UFH or enoxaparin (both with a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor) was evaluated in the Acute Catheterization and Urgent Intervention Triage strategY (ACUITY) trial of almost 14,000 patients with moderate- to high-risk acute coronary syndromes (non-ST elevation ACS and unstable angina) undergoing PCI [26,27]. Prior to randomization, about 64 percent of patients were receiving either UFH or enoxaparin, while about 36 percent were receiving neither. Nearly 65 percent of patients were taking a P2Y12 receptor blocker (either clopidogrel or ticlopidine) at the time of angiography. Primary end points included a composite of ischemic complications (death, MI, or unplanned revascularization for ischemia at 30 days) and major bleeding.Bivalirudin alone was noninferior to UFH or enoxaparin for the rate of ischemic complications (7.8 versus 7.3 percent, relative risk 1.08, 95% CI 0.93-1.24), while the rate of major bleeding was significantly lower with bivalirudin monotherapy (3.0 versus 5.7 percent, relative risk 0.53, 95% CI 0.43-0.65). A pre-specified analysis of 30-day and 1 year major bleeding rates revealed a progressive increase in the frequency of bleeding with age irrespective of therapy [28]. However, bivalirudin was associated with a significantly lower rate of non-CABG major bleeding at all ages with the magnitude of the absolute difference greatest in patients ≥75 years (5.8 versus 10.1 percent).The impact of switching from a heparin to bivalirudin was evaluated in a substudy of the ACUITY trial [29]. Patients who were switched had similar outcomes compared to those not switched. This information is relevant to the extent that in many hospitals, UFH or enoxaparin is used as the first anticoagulant in most patients with non-ST elevation ACS, often due to the high cost of prolonged bivalirudin therapy. ACUITY also emphasized the importance of clopidogrel pretreatment in patients given bivalirudin who are not treated with a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor. On subset analysis, ischemic outcomes tended to be worse if clopidogrel was not given before angiography or PCI. (See "Antithrombotic therapy for elective percutaneous coronary intervention: Clinical studies", section on 'Bivalirudin'.)The benefits of bivalirudin compared to UFH in patients with non-ST elevation MI were also evaluated in the ISAR-REACT 4 trial, which randomly assigned 1721 patients with non-ST elevation MI to heparin plus GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor or bivalirudin monotherapy immediately before PCI [30]. At 30 days, the following findings were noted:●There was no significant difference in the rate of the primary composite end point (death, large recurrent myocardial infarction, urgent target–vessel revascularization [TVR], or major bleeding) between heparin plus GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor and bivalirudin (10.9 versus 11.0 percent; relative risk 0.99, 95% CI 0.74-1.32).●There was no significant difference in the rate of the secondary end point of death, any recurrent MI, or urgent TVR (12.8 versus 13.4 percent, respectively).●There was significantly more major bleeding with UFH plus GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor (4.6 versus 2.6 percent).Direct thrombin inhibitors summary — Among the different direct thrombin inhibitors, bivalirudin is the best studied agent and appears to have the best efficacy to safety profile. When compared to UFH (or enoxaparin) plus a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor in patients with moderate to high risk acute coronary syndromes undergoing PCI, it is as effective and is associated with a lower risk of bleeding (table 1). The benefit of bivalirudin is preserved even in patients switched from heparin or enoxaparin. Bivalirudin has not been compared to fondaparinux.Bivalirudin has not been evaluated in patients managed with a conservative strategy and is thus not recommended in this setting.FACTOR XA INHIBITORS — Fondaparinux and otamixaban are two factor Xa inhibitors that have been evaluated for efficacy and safety in patients with non-ST elevation coronary syndrome (NSTEACS). The former has an established clinical role while the latter does not. (See "Anticoagulation with direct thrombin inhibitors and direct factor Xa inhibitors", section on 'Direct factor Xa inhibitors'.)Fondaparinux — Fondaparinux is a reasonable anticoagulant choice in ACS patients, particularly those at increased risk of bleeding (table 1), based principally on the results of the OASIS-5 trial. In OASIS-5, 20,078 NSTEACS patients were randomly assigned to fondaparinux (2.5 mg/day) or enoxaparin (1 mg/kg twice daily) for a mean of six days (anticoagulant was generally stopped after PCI, if it was performed) [31-34]. Over 60 percent of patients underwent catheterization and over 30 percent had percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). Patients received weight-adjusted UFH during PCI if the last dose of enoxaparin was greater than six hours before the procedure. For patients who received an initial dose of subcutaneous fondaparinux and then underwent PCI, an additional dose was given intravenously (table 2). After isolated reports of catheter thrombosis, a protocol amendment allowed for the addition of open-label UFH in patients receiving fondaparinux at the discretion of the investigator.The following findings were noted:●The two groups had similar rates of the primary end point, defined as death, myocardial infarction (MI), or refractory ischemia at nine days (5.8 versus 5.7 percent with enoxaparin), and the secondary end point of death or MI (4.1 percent in both groups).●At longer term follow-up, there was a reduction in the primary end point with fondaparinux at 30 days (2.9 versus 3.5 percent, hazard ratio 0.83, 95% CI 0.71-0.97) and six months (5.8 versus 6.5 percent, hazard ratio 0.89, 95% CI 0.81-1.00). These differences were entirely due to a significantly lower rate of death.●The rate of major bleeding was significantly reduced with fondaparinux (2.2 versus 4.1 percent, HR 0.52, 95% CI 0.44-0.61). The benefits and risks were consistent among various subgroups, including age and sex, the spectrum of renal function, and whether or not revascularization was performed within nine days [31,32].The safety of fondaparinux relative to enoxaparin was confirmed in two important prespecified subgroups:●In the 6238 patients who underwent PCI, fondaparinux significantly reduced major bleeding at day nine (2.4 versus 5.1 percent, hazard ratio 0.46, 95% CI 0.35-0.61), with comparable rates of the combined end point of death, MI or stroke [33]. ●Fondaparinux significantly reduced major bleeding in the 3630 patients who received glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors and the 13,531 patients who received platelet P2Y12 receptor blockers (5.2 versus 8.2 percent, hazard ratio 0.46, 95% CI 0.35-0.61 and 3.4 versus 5.4 percent, hazard ratio 0.62, 95% CI 0.52-0.73 respectively) [34]. Ischemic events were similar between the two treatment arms in these two subsets, as in the entire OASIS-5 population. In addition, these findings regarding safety and efficacy were similar in the 3246 patients who received both antiplatelet therapies.However, fondaparinux was associated with a small but significant increase in catheter-related thrombi (in patients undergoing PCI) compared to enoxaparin (0.9 versus 0.4 percent). The frequency of catheter related thrombi was significantly reduced in both groups in those patients who received open-label UFH before the procedure.The observation in the OASIS-5 trial of a small but significant increase in catheter-related thrombi, which was mitigated by the use of UFH, raises the question as to the optimal dose of UFH in such patients. This issue was directly addressed in the FUTURA/OASIS 8 trial in which 2026 high-risk patients with non-ST elevation acute coronary syndromes treated with fondaparinux and scheduled to undergo PCI within 72 hours were randomly assigned to either a standard dose UFH regimen (85 units/kg bolus with additional boluses based on an activated clotting time dosing algorithm) or a fixed low dose (50 units/kg without activated clotting time) [35]. For patients receiving a glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor, the UFH bolus in the standard-dose group was lowered to 50 units/kg.At 48 hours after PCI, there was no significant difference between low-dose and standard regimens in the rate of the primary composite endpoint of major bleeding, minor bleeding, or major vascular access-site complications (4.7 versus 5.8 percent, respectively). The composite secondary outcome of major bleeding at 48 hours with death, myocardial infarction, or target vessel revascularization within 30 days occurred more often in the low-dose group, nearly attaining statistical significance (5.8 versus 3.9 percent; odds ratio 1.51, 95% CI 1.00-2.28). Catheter thrombus rates were very low and not statistically different in the two groups (0.5 and 0.1 percent, respectively). (See "Periprocedural bleeding in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention".)Otamixaban — The TAO trial randomly assigned 13,229 patients with NSTEACS scheduled to undergo an early invasive strategy to the investigational drug otamixaban or unfractionated heparin plus eptifibatide [36]. There was no significant difference between the two strategies in the rate of the primary composite efficacy outcome of all-cause death or new MI through day seven, but the rate of the bleeding was greater with otamixaban.Factor Xa summary — Fondaparinux is a reasonable anticoagulant option to UFH, enoxaparin, or bivalirudin for patients with non-ST elevation ACS: ●For patients managed with a conservative strategy, we prefer fondaparinux or enoxaparin to unfractionated heparin or bivalirudin. Issues of cost and local practice may influence the choice between the two. We prefer fondaparinux to enoxaparin in patients at increased risk of bleeding (table 1), based on the findings in OASIS-5. ●For those patients undergoing PCI in whom fondaparinux was chosen as the initial anticoagulant, we recommend switching to standard dose UFH, with further dosing of the latter based on the activated clotting time, as was done in the FUTURA/OASIS 8 trial. Although bivalirudin has not been evaluated in this setting, we believe that switching to bivalirudin is also a reasonable anticoagulant strategy. We do not recommend using otamixaban for these patients.APPROACH TO ANTICOAGULATION — Anticoagulant therapy should be given as soon as possible after diagnosis to all patients with non-ST elevation ACS. This recommendation for early use is based on the fact that this therapy was started within a few hours of diagnosis in all of the randomized trials. The choice between UFH, enoxaparin, bivalirudin, or fondaparinux is determined by whether the patient is managed by an early invasive or a conservative approach. (See "Risk stratification after non-ST elevation acute coronary syndrome", section on 'Early risk stratification tools'.)●For patients managed with a conservative approach, we prefer either fondaparinux or enoxaparin to either bivalirudin or UFH. Bivalirudin has not been adequately assessed in this population, and enoxaparin leads to fewer adverse cardiovascular events when compared to UFH. In addition, enoxaparin is easier to administer (subcutaneous as opposed to the intravenous route with UFH) and requires no laboratory monitoring. (See 'Heparins summary' above.) The choice between fondaparinux and enoxaparin may be determined by issues of cost and local practice. For patients at higher risk of bleeding, we prefer fondaparinux to enoxaparin.●For patients managed with an early invasive strategy (angiography within 4 to 48 hours), bivalirudin, fondaparinux, UFH, and enoxaparin are all effective at reducing the rates of ischemic events. However, the risk of bleeding appears to be greater with enoxaparin than each of the other anticoagulants. The choice between bivalirudin, fondaparinux, enoxaparin, and UFH should be made based on issues of cost, risk of bleeding, and local practice. When fondaparinux is chosen, UFH (or bivalirudin) should be given before percutaneous coronary intervention; when UFH is chosen, we suggest switching from UFH to bivalirudin. ●For patients who will be referred to the catheterization laboratory for catheterization within four hours, usually due to patient instability for reasons such as refractory angina, heart failure, arrhythmia, or hemodynamic instability, we prefer UFH or bivalirudin. Fondaparinux makes less sense in this setting as heparin or bivalirudin would need to be added to fondaparinux soon after starting the latter. (See 'Factor Xa summary' above.) ●For patients who undergo an invasive approach, and who were started on either UFH or fondaparinux, we prefer switching to bivalirudin (See 'Bivalirudin' above.). We acknowledge that the use of bivalirudin after fondaparinux (which otherwise requires the use of UFH at the time of PCI) has not been formally studied. ANTICOAGULANT REGIMENSDose — The initial dosing schedules are as follows:●UFH – Intravenous bolus of 60-70 units/kg (maximum dose 5000 units) followed by 12 units/kg per hour intravenously to achieve an activated partial thromboplastin time of 50 to 75 seconds. ●Enoxaparin – No loading dose is necessary. Dosing is 1 mg/kg subcutaneously every 12 hours or for patients with an estimated creatinine clearance less than 30 mL/min, 1 mg/kg subcutaneously daily.●Fondaparinux – 2.5 mg subcutaneously once daily in patients managed with a non-invasive strategy. (See 'Fondaparinux' above.)●Bivalirudin – Intravenous bolus of 0.1 mg/kg and an infusion of 0.25 mg/kg per hour before angiography; if PCI is performed, an additional 0.5 mg/kg bolus is given and the infusion rate is increased to 1.75 mg/kg per hour.For patients who undergo PCI after initial medical therapy, subsequent dosing depends upon which anticoagulant was given initially:●If UFH was given, we continue with an additional bolus of UFH after sheath insertion with an activated clotting time (ACT) of 200 to 250 seconds if the patient is treated with a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor and 250 to 300 seconds if a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor has not been given and is not planned during PCI.●If enoxaparin was initiated and two or more doses were given and the last dose was given less than eight hours earlier, we proceed without additional enoxaparin or UFH. If a patient was given only one dose or the last dose was more than eight hours earlier, we give an additional bolus of enoxaparin (0.3 mg) or give UFH according to the above protocol. It may be better to continue with enoxaparin, especially if anticoagulation may be continued after the procedure, since extrapolation from SYNERGY suggests that switching to UFH may be associated with an increased risk of death or MI at 30 days. (See 'Enoxaparin versus UFH' above.)●If fondaparinux was initiated, UFH in standard dose (50 U/kg bolus, with an ACT goal of greater than 200 seconds) or bivalirudin in standard dose is given. (See 'Fondaparinux' above.) Duration — The duration of anticoagulant therapy depends on the initial management strategy. Although the optimal treatment length has not been determined, the following represent commonly employed regimens in clinical practice (which we consider reasonable):●For patients undergoing PCI, anticoagulant therapy is stopped at the end of the procedure in uncomplicated cases. Continuation of anticoagulation beyond the times suggested above should be undertaken only if:•The PCI is complicated and there is an ongoing risk or recurrent ischemia.•There is evidence of high risk for systemic or venous thromboembolism (anterior STEMI, severe left ventricular dysfunction, heart failure, history of systemic or pulmonary embolus, or echocardiographic evidence of mitral or left ventricular thrombus) or a preexistent rational for long term anticoagulation, such as patients with prosthetic heart valves or atrial fibrillation. •In cases where a platelet P2Y12 receptor blocker has been given just before or after PCI and there is a concern about less than optimal antithrombotic effect. Under these circumstances, it is reasonable to continue a full infusion dose of bivalirudin for up to four hours after the procedure. This extended use of bivalirudin was used in the first randomized trial of Hirulog (bivalirudin) in patients with unstable angina and allowed for in the ACUITY, HORIZONS-AMI trials, and REPLACE-2 trials [4,27,37,38]. (See 'Bivalirudin' above and "Antithrombotic therapy for elective percutaneous coronary intervention: Clinical studies", section on 'Bivalirudin' and "Anticoagulant therapy in acute ST elevation myocardial infarction", section on 'UFH compared to bivalirudin'.)●For patients undergoing a non-invasive (conservative) strategy, UFH has been continued two to five days in most trials. We suggest a minimum of 48 hours for the duration of UFH; longer is reasonable in patients at low risk of bleeding (table 1). Fondaparinux and enoxaparin have been continued for the duration of hospitalization (up to eight days).RECOMMENDATIONS OF OTHERS — Guidelines for the use of anticoagulant therapy in patients with non-ST elevation ACS are available from the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (2014) [39], and the European Society of Cardiology/European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (2014) [40]. Each of the guidelines makes a strong recommendation for the use of anticoagulant therapy in all patients with acute coronary syndromes (ACS). The following are important points made by in these guidelines:●From the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association:•Among patients in whom an invasive strategy is selected, a strong recommendation is made for the use of enoxaparin, unfractionated heparin (UFH), or bivalirudin. •Among patients in whom a conservative strategy is selected, a strong recommendation is made for the use enoxaparin, fondaparinux, or UFH, with the first two preferred to the latter. ●In the 2014 European Society of Cardiology/European Association for Cardio-Thoracic surgery guideline on myocardial revascularization, bivalirudin is preferred to UFH or enoxaparin.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS — Anticoagulant therapy with either bivalirudin, fondaparinux, unfractionated heparin (UFH), or enoxaparin prevents thrombus related ischemic events in patients with non-ST elevation acute coronary syndromes (ACS), which includes unstable angina and non-ST elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI). The following are our recommendations for the use of anticoagulants in patients with non-ST elevation ACS:●We recommend anticoagulant therapy for all patients (Grade 1A). (See 'Anticoagulant versus placebo' above.) This recommendation is made for patients irrespective of whether an invasive or a conservative approach is taken. Anticoagulant therapy should be given as soon as possible after diagnosis and should be given in conjunction with recommended antiplatelet therapy. (See 'Approach to anticoagulation' above and "Antiplatelet agents in acute non-ST elevation acute coronary syndromes", section on 'Summary and recommendations'.)●For patients managed with an early invasive strategy (angiography within 4 to 48 hours), we suggest bivalirudin or UFH as opposed to enoxaparin (Grade 2B) or to fondaparinux (Grade 2C). When fondaparinux is chosen, UFH (or bivalirudin) should be given before percutaneous coronary intervention. ●For patients who will be referred to the catheterization laboratory within four hours (usually due to patient instability for reasons such as refractory angina, heart failure, arrhythmia, or hemodynamic instability), we recommend UFH or bivalirudin as opposed to fondaparinux or enoxaparin (Grade 1B). (See 'Approach to anticoagulation' above.) ●For patients in whom a conservative (non-invasive) strategy is planned, we recommend either fondaparinux or enoxaparin in preference to either unfractionated heparin or bivalirudin (Grade 1B). (See 'Heparins summary' above and 'Factor Xa summary' above and 'Direct thrombin inhibitors summary' above and 'Approach to anticoagulation' above.)The choice between fondaparinux and enoxaparin should be guided by issues of cost and local practice. For patients at higher risk of bleeding (table 1), we suggest fondaparinux (Grade 2B). (See 'Enoxaparin versus UFH' above and 'Factor Xa summary' above.)The dosing schedules and duration of therapy for these anticoagulants are discussed above. (See 'Anticoagulant regimens' above.)
		
