
			INTRODUCTION — Noma is a severe disfiguring gangrene of the mouth and face that starts as a gingival ulcer and spreads rapidly through the tissues of the mouth and face [1-4]. Unlike other infectious processes of the face, which may progress along anatomic spaces of the head and neck, noma can disrupt anatomic barriers and spread through muscle and bone [4]. The resulting gangrene may involve the maxilla, the mandible, and extend to the nose and infraorbital margins (picture 1). The word noma derives from the Greek "voun," meaning to devour, emphasizing the rapid progression of the disease [5,6].Noma is categorized by the World Health Organization (WHO) as a necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis. Synonyms include cancrum oris and fusospirochetal gangrene. The name "cancrum oris" was introduced in Britain in the mid-17th century and is still in common usage in the United Kingdom [6,7]. According to an 1848 description, orofacial noma is a "gangrenous affection of the mouth, especially attacking children in whom the constitution is altered by bad hygiene and serious illness, especially from the eruptive fevers, beginning as an ulcer of the mucous membrane, with edema of the face, extending from within out, rapidly destroying the soft parts and the bone, and almost always quickly fatal" [8].Mortality can be reduced with prompt, appropriate treatment, though noma remains one of the most devastating and disfiguring human diseases worldwide and has been designated a health priority by the WHO [3,9-12].MICROBIOLOGY — Noma is a polymicrobial infection associated predominantly with anaerobic organisms [3,13]. Fusobacterium necrophorum has been observed most frequently in culture and appears to be an important organism for the development of noma [14-17]. Virulence factors of F. necrophorum include proteolytic enzymes and toxins capable of tissue destruction [17]. F. necrophorum also produces a growth stimulating factor for Prevotella intermedia, which facilitates lipid degradation.Other microorganisms cultivated from noma lesions among Nigerian children are similar to those seen in adult periodontitis and are also capable of releasing enzymes that can degrade host tissues [18]. These include P. intermedia, alpha-hemolytic streptococci, Pseudomonas spp, Actinomyces spp, and Peptostreptococci micros [3,14-17,19-21]. Spirochetes have also been observed at the advancing edge of active lesions with dark-field microscopy [14]. Molecular studies have demonstrated the complex diversity of microorganisms associated with noma, including 67 bacterial species of which 25 have not yet been grown in vitro [22]. Herpes viruses have also been implicated, particularly herpes simplex virus and cytomegalovirus [1,20,23-25]. A molecular study in Niger Republic attributed the development of noma to an imbalance of oral bacterial flora, reflecting reduced bacterial diversity and a prominently increased proportion of Prevotella genus [26].EPIDEMIOLOGY — The global distribution of noma is poorly understood. Many affected individuals die in the acute stage of the disease before presenting for clinical attention, many reside in rural areas, and some hide it deliberately because of the stigma associated with the disease [3,9,27]. It is estimated that only about 10 percent of patients seek care during the acute stage of illness [2,5,9,12,27,28].The incidence of noma is highest in sub-Saharan Africa; the disease also occurs in Asia and Latin America [6,9,12,27,29-31]. The World Health Organization estimates the annual global incidence of noma to be around 100,000 to 140,000 new cases [32]. In countries such as Gambia, Niger, Nigeria, and Senegal, the annual incidence of noma based on hospital records ranges from 0.28 to 1.9 per 1000 children [27,33,34]. In West Africa, the peak age range for acute illness is one to six years, although late stages do occur in adolescents and adults [3,5,6,9,35]. The fatality rate in the absence of treatment is about 80 percent [32]. With appropriate treatment, mortality rates are less than 10 percent [5,9].The HIV/AIDS epidemic has been associated with an increase in the number of noma cases in developing and developed countries [1,7,36,37]. Among 48 patients with noma seen at the University of Zimbabwe between 2002 and 2006, all were seropositive for HIV [38].Noma occurred worldwide until the early 20th century, when it essentially disappeared from the developed countries; some cases occurred in concentration camps during World War II [39,40]. The near eradication of noma from developed countries coincided with improvements in living standards, prior to the discovery of penicillin [2,6,9].Risk factors — Poverty is a critical risk factor for noma [1,6,35,41]. Additional associated factors include malnutrition, poor sanitation, poor oral hygiene, limited access to healthcare services, close residential proximity to livestock, nomadic lifestyle, and high prevalence of infectious diseases including malaria, measles, AIDS, diarrhea, and tuberculosis [3,9,24,41]. Infants and children are particularly susceptible. Noma does not appear to be a transmissible disease in humans; cases have not been reported in caregivers of children with the disease.Malnutrition — Chronic malnutrition is common in communities at risk for noma, as it increases susceptibility to infection [3,16,27,35,42]. Dietary deficiencies of essential amino acids, omega-3 fatty acid, and micronutrients are frequently observed among malnourished individuals. The developing immune system is influenced by many of these nutrients during the prenatal period [3,43-46]. The prevalence of intrauterine growth retardation leading to infants who are small for gestational age (SGA) is high in communities at risk for noma; the infant mortality rate in such settings may be as high as 114 per 1000 live births [35,47,48]. SGA infants have compromised thymic function that may persist through adolescence to adult life [3,49-51].Acute necrotizing gingivitis — Acute necrotizing gingivitis (ANG) is an important risk condition for noma. ANG is characterized by ulceration involving one or more interdental papillae, pain, fetid breath, bad taste, fever, and lymphadenopathy (picture 2) [25,52,53]. The most common sites of ANG are the premolar and molar area, followed by the mandibular incisor area. Ulceration of the overlapping inner cheek may also occur.In sub-Saharan Africa, ANG typically occurs among malnourished children two to six years of age. The prevalence ranges from 2 to 18 percent in some rural communities [3,9,27,54]. In developed settings, ANG is rare; it is occasionally observed in severely immunocompromised individuals such as patients with HIV infection and those receiving organ transplants [25,52,55].As with noma, ANG is likely attributable to periodontal bacteria and herpesviruses [23,56,57]. Cytomegalovirus appears to promote release of inflammatory mediators as well as growth of anaerobic microorganisms [54,56].Other factors — Additional risk factors for noma include antecedent infection (particularly measles and malaria) and immunosuppressing conditions.Measles infection alters cytokine activity, leading to immunosuppression that can persist up to six months after acute infection [58-61]. The complications of measles in malnourished children include diarrhea, pneumonia, malnutrition, and stomatitis [24,35,62]. Stomatitis promotes reactivation of latent herpes viruses and may result in peribuccal, perinasal, and infraorbital ulcerative lesions [24,62-64].Malaria infection also alters cytokine activity leading to immune impairment [65-67]. Cases of noma following malaria have been described in Nigeria and Turkey [37,41,68].Noma has been described in the following clinical circumstances (see "Periodontal disease in children: Associated systemic conditions"):●HIV infection/AIDS [38,69-71]●Type 2 diabetes mellitus [72]●Immune deficient states such as familial neutropenia, histiocytosis syndromes, and severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) [19,73-77]●Immunosuppressive therapy [78]●Autoimmune diseases in the absence of immunosuppressive therapy [73]●Hypophosphatasia (an inborn error of metabolism caused by deficiency of tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase) [75]CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS — The diagnosis of noma is based on clinical manifestations. Suggestive clues include recent or concurrent infection preceding onset of facial swelling and excessive salivation in the setting of malnutrition. In general, there are three stages of noma (which may overlap): an acute phase, a gangrenous phase, and a scarring phase [4,6,9,17].Acute phase — Symptoms associated with the acute phase of noma include mouth soreness, facial swelling, fetid breath, excessive salivation, and difficulty eating [5,9,10]. The medical history is frequently notable for recent or concurrent infections such as diarrheal illness, malaria, measles, tuberculosis, or HIV [3,6,9,23,79].In general, children with acute noma are malnourished, as evidenced by growth retardation, hair discoloration, and/or limb edema [2,24]. In one study of Nigerian children <4 years of age with acute noma, about 90 percent had stunted growth and were underweight; more than two-thirds were severely affected [35]. Among age- and sex-matched neighborhood children without noma, about 40 percent were stunted and underweight; less than one-third were severely affected [35].Laboratory findings may include severe anemia (hemoglobin levels as low as 5 to 6 g/dL), white blood cell counts of 20,000 to 30,000 per microL, and hypoalbuminemia [2,24,80]. Anemia is often most severe among the most stunted children with noma.Gangrenous phase — Noma likely begins as a gingival inflammatory lesion that spreads to the labiogingival fold and then to the mucosal surface of the cheek and lip [2,5]. Subsequently, an area of bluish-black discoloration may appear on the cheek (picture 1) [5,28]. After this finding appears, progression of disease resulting in perforation of the cheek is very rapid (usually a matter of days) [1,2,5,28]. During this time, there is extensive intraoral destruction (picture 3). Soft tissue sloughing leaves a well-demarcated deep wound with exposed bones and teeth. Ulcerative gingivitis or periodontitis is considered to have progressed to noma once there is exposure of the alveolar bone [2,62].The disease is usually unilateral but can occur bilaterally. Some cases may occur with ectopic lesions involving the scalp, neck, shoulders, perineum, and vulva [5,81].Scarring phase — Scarring sets in following the acute and gangrenous stages, leading to trismus and severe facial disfigurement [28,61,69]. Sequelae of noma depend on the sites affected and the extent of tissue destruction; they may include displacement or exfoliation of teeth, facial mutilation, bony fusion between the maxilla and mandible, trismus, poor speech, and difficulty feeding [5,28,61]. Persistent leakage of saliva is a major problem in patients with extensive destruction of the maxilla, lower lip, cheek, and/or floor of the mouth [3,5].Tissue defects may be evaluated using the NOITULP classification (Nose, Outer cheek, Inner cheek, Trismus, Upper lip, Lower lip, and Particularities) [61,82]. Particularities refer to additional manifestations such as loss of lower eyelid tissue; involvement of the orbit, skin of the chin; and defects of the maxillary sinus or palate [82].PATHOGENESIS — The pathogenesis of noma is not fully understood. The following sections summarize observed findings.Histopathology — Histopathology generally demonstrates necrosis of the epidermis with acanthosis around the rim of the epithelium [4,28,78]. The necrotic area is well circumscribed; at the margins, there is hyperplasia with ballooning of the epithelial cells. The dermis typically has a heavy infiltrate of polymorphonuclear neutrophils; phagocytosed bacteria may be observed. Separation of collagen bundles due to edema may be observed. Blood vessels are frequently dilated and filled with inflammatory cells. Small and large cocci of various morphologies and gram-negative cocci bacilli may be seen.Role of malnutrition — Noma is associated with very low levels of most essential amino acids and significant reductions in plasma levels of vitamin A, vitamin C, zinc, albumin, and hemoglobin [16,24,29,43,80,83-85]. Given the frequency of multiple concurrent deficiencies, no single nutrient deficiency has been causally related.Leptin, a polypeptide produced by adipose tissue involved in the inflammatory response and immune function, is significantly diminished in children with noma [86-89]. The prolonged inflammatory response in the setting of noma may downregulate or exhaust leptin production; similar observations have been described in the setting of tuberculosis with associated wasting and chronic inflammation [90].Inflammatory mediators — Children with noma have higher inflammatory cytokine levels than neighborhood village children without noma; both groups have higher levels than age-matched healthy urban children [16]. In the setting of noma, there appears to be disruption of complex interactions involving tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and the TNF family receptor herpes virus entry mediator (HVEM), leading to T cell stimulation and promotion of mucosal inflammation [91-93].The circulating cytokine patterns observed in children with noma resemble findings in other diseases characterized by necrotic lesions [16]. Increased mucosal and systemic concentrations of many cytokines (particularly TNF and interleukin-18) are significantly elevated in noma and inflammatory bowel disease as well as measles, malaria, and sepsis [16,35,94-101].DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS — The diagnosis of noma is straightforward in the gangrenous stage [102]. The disease is readily recognized by the rapid course of inflammation in the setting of antecedent infection (measles, malaria, tuberculosis, etc). Diseases with similar characteristics include (see related topics):●Noma neonatorum – Noma neonatorum resembles noma in children but occurs during the first few weeks of life in premature and low birth weight infants [103-106]. The gangrene generally involves the oronasal region, eyelids, and perineum. Cultures may demonstrate Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp, or staphylococci.●Ecthyma gangrenosum – Ecthyma gangrenosum resembles noma histopathologically. Like noma neonatorum, ecthyma may involve the oral cavity, nose, and perineum. Cultures usually demonstrate P. aeruginosa [107].●Mycobacterial infection – Buruli ulcer due to Mycobacterium ulcerans infection usually occurs on exposed areas, particularly the lower limbs [108,109]. It typically presents with indolent, painless, undermined ulcers; the prevalence is highest in West Africa. Tuberculosis and leprosy may present with oral ulceronecrotic lesions.●Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis – Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis causes disfiguring destruction of the mucous membranes of the nose and mouth. The majority of cases occur in South America, particularly Bolivia, Brazil, and Peru [110].●Oral and maxillofacial myiasis – Oral myiasis may cause a lesion resembling noma in adults and older adults. It is caused by deposition of larval flies (eg, Diptera family Sarcophagidae) in preexisting wounds such as in leprosy, traumatic injury, or skin carcinoma [111,112].●Craniocervical necrotizing fasciitis – Craniocervical necrotizing fasciitis originating from odontogenic abscess may lead to gangrene of the cheek in older adult individuals with diabetes mellitus [113,114].Other entities that may resemble noma include Ludwig's angina, malignant oral lesions, or syphilis; these generally occur among adults [5].TREATMENT — Acute treatment of noma consists of antibiotics, wound care, and replacement of needed fluids, electrolytes, and nutrition. Several months to one year after the acute phase, surgery is performed for correction of trismus and flap creation. Physiotherapy to reduce fibrous scarring should be initiated during the healing phase and continued after surgery. Given the cosmetic and functional debilitation associated with noma, attention to psychosocial needs is also an important component of treatment.Antibiotics — The optimal approach to antimicrobial therapy is uncertain. The dose and type of antibiotic depend on individual circumstances and available clinical tools. Reasonable regimens include penicillin in combination with metronidazole or streptomycin [9,78,115]. Others prefer monotherapy with metronidazole since noma is associated predominantly with anaerobic organisms [10,115]. Some favor a combination of amoxicillin and metronidazole [26].For children who can swallow oral medication, antibiotics may be given in tablet or syrup form. Dosing for penicillin VK is 25 to 50 mg/kg/day in three divided doses; dosing for metronidazole is 30 mg/kg/day in three or four divided doses. For children who cannot tolerate oral medication, parenteral therapy with penicillin G Procaine may be administered. Dosing is 25,000 to 50,000 units/kg/day in divided doses one to two times/day, not to exceed 4.8 million units/24 hours.Wound care — Meticulous attention to wound care is necessary to reduce the likelihood of secondary infection. The wound should be dressed daily with gauze soaked in antiseptic [9,10,28]. If possible, the mouth should be rinsed with a solution of chlorhexidine digluconate (0.12 to 0.20%) daily [9,10]. This may be continued for up to one week.Fluid, electrolytes, and nutrition — Management of acute noma requires rehydration with correction of electrolyte abnormalities followed by nutritional rehabilitation with a high protein diet enriched with essential micronutrients. At the Noma Children Hospital in Sokoto, Nigeria, a highly enriched nutrition formula (Enfortal, donated through the Dutch Noma Foundation) has yielded good results [61]. Feeding by mouth is preferred. If this is not possible due to pain, tissue destruction, or severe trismus, parenteral nutrition may be administered [5,28,61]. (See "Maintenance fluid therapy in children" and "Oral rehydration therapy" and "Enteral nutrition in infants and children".)Surgical repair — The goal of surgery is to improve cosmetic appearance as well as oral functions including eating, drinking, swallowing, and speech [5,9,10,28,82]. In the acute phase, intervention for control of secondary hemorrhage, removal of loose teeth, and wound debridement may be needed to prevent secondary infection and promote healing [69]. To allow time for resolution of necrosis, more definitive surgery is performed several months to one year after the acute phase.The techniques for correction of deformities depend on location and severity of the lesions, available resources, and abilities of the surgical team [61,82,116]. Preoperative classification of the tissue defects is essential for planning surgical intervention [5,9,82].Initial surgical intervention entails correction of trismus if present. This requires radical excision of fibrous bands restricting jaw opening [5,9,28,82,115-118]. Thereafter, various flap techniques may be employed; options range from simple flaps and autoplasty to complex procedures involving microsurgery [5,82,118,119].These procedures require general anesthesia with intubation, which may be difficult in settings with limited facilities [82,115,120]. Regional centers for noma surgical rehabilitation have been established in a number of developing countries, including the Noma Children Hospital (Sokoto, Nigeria), Stiftung Kinderhilfe (a German NGO), and the Dutch Noma Foundation [61]. Another organization, the German Hilfsaktion Noma, treats some cases in the Niger Republic and transfers very difficult cases to Germany.Following surgical repair, some functional and cosmetic defects may persist. Therefore, attention to psychosocial needs is also an important component of treatment [115,118].Other measures — The patient should undergo evaluation of and treatment for predisposing systemic diseases including malaria, measles, tuberculosis, and HIV infection. Records of routine immunizations against endemic diseases should be verified.Physiotherapy to reduce fibrous scarring should be initiated during the healing phase and continued after surgery [116]. If formal physiotherapy is not available, wooden spatulas may be used to keep the mouth open; an alternative device is the therabite (Atos Medical, Germany) [10].Following surgical repair, some functional and cosmetic defects may persist. Therefore, attention to psychosocial needs is also an important component of treatment [115,118].PREVENTION — Prevention of noma requires a multidisciplinary approach with attention to routine healthcare needs, sanitation, nutrition, and public awareness.Healthcare personnel should know the risk factors for and early signs of noma and screen children at risk accordingly. The risk factors include:●Severe growth failure in the first 6 to 12 months of life●Severe malnutrition and poor eating habits●Persistent diarrhea●Presence of oral mucosal ulcers●Malodorous breathProper oral hygiene practices must be taught and promoted. For areas in which toothbrushes and toothpaste are not available, children should be taught to use soft chewing sticks or sponges, under adult supervision. Many of the traditional chewing sticks used in various developing settings are fashioned from plants containing active medicinal properties. Several are from the tea plant family and may concentrate fluoride from the soil. For very young children, cotton buds may substitute for chewing sticks. Saline solution is helpful for mouth rinsing.As oral ulcers are frequently preceded by antecedent infection, administration of routine immunizations is also a priority. (See "Standard immunizations for children and adolescents".)Sanitation inside and outside of the residential quarters requires careful attention to the following issues:●Clean drinking water must be readily available.●Human waste must be removed in a timely fashion.●Livestock should be segregated from human living quarters.Adequate nutrition in the first three to six months of life is an important priority; breastfeeding should be encouraged. Weaning foods for infants should be prepared under hygienic conditions.Noma occurs almost exclusively in resource-limited settings in which the general understanding of the causes of disease may be limited and illness may be interpreted within the framework of superstitious beliefs. Information campaigns are needed at regional and global levels.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS●Noma is a severe disfiguring gangrene of the mouth and face that starts as a gingival ulcer and spreads rapidly through the tissues of the mouth and face. It is associated with poverty, malnutrition, and poor sanitation. (See 'Introduction' above.)●Noma is a polymicrobial infection associated predominantly with anaerobic organisms, although identifying a specific causative infectious agent can be difficult. Fusobacterium necrophorum is observed most frequently in culture and is suspected to be an important organism for the development of noma. (See 'Microbiology' above.)●The incidence of noma is highest in sub-Saharan Africa; the disease also occurs in Asia and Latin America. Risk factors include poor oral hygiene, limited access to healthcare services, close residential proximity to livestock, nomadic lifestyle, and high prevalence of infectious diseases including malaria, measles, AIDS, diarrhea, and tuberculosis. Infants and children are particularly susceptible. (See 'Epidemiology' above.)●The diagnosis of noma is based on clinical manifestations. Suggestive clues include recent or concurrent infection preceding onset of facial swelling and excessive salivation in the setting of malnutrition. In general, there are three stages of noma (which may overlap): an acute phase, a gangrenous phase, and a scarring phase. (See 'Clinical manifestations and diagnosis' above.)●Acute treatment consists of antibiotics, wound care, and replacement of needed fluids, electrolytes, and nutrition. We suggest penicillin for antibiotic therapy of noma (Grade 2C). Dosing is as outlined above; the duration is 10 to 14 days. Several months to one year after the acute phase, surgery is performed for correction of trismus and flap creation. Physiotherapy to reduce fibrous scarring should be initiated during the healing phase and continued after surgery. Attention to psychosocial needs is also an important component of treatment, given the cosmetic and functional debilitation associated with noma. (See 'Treatment' above.)●Prevention of noma requires a multidisciplinary approach with attention to routine healthcare needs, sanitation, nutrition, and awareness. Measles immunization substantially reduces the risk of noma. Prevention of malaria in pregnant women receiving antenatal care is also important, since placental malaria impairs transplacental transfer of maternal antibodies to the infant. (See 'Prevention' above.)
		
