
			INTRODUCTION — Hyperpigmentation is the darkening or increase in the natural color of the skin usually due to an increased deposition of melanin (hypermelanosis) in the epidermis and/or dermis. Less frequently, it may be caused by the deposition in the dermis of endogenous or exogenous pigments, such as hemosiderin, iron, or heavy metals.Hyperpigmentation is a feature of a multitude of clinical conditions, ranging from normal variations of skin color to acquired and inherited syndromes, and is one of the most common reasons for dermatologic consultation, particularly in patients with darker skin types [1-3]. Although hyperpigmentation is not harmful, it can cause significant cosmetic disfigurement and become a persistent psychosocial burden for the patient, due to the limited efficacy of the available treatments.This topic will review the approach to the patient with hyperpigmentation disorders. Melasma is discussed separately. Benign and malignant melanocytic tumors are discussed separately.●(See "Melasma".)●(See "Benign pigmented skin lesions other than melanocytic nevi (moles)".)●(See "Acquired melanocytic nevi (moles)".)●(See "Skin examination and clinical features of melanoma".)PATHOPHYSIOLOGYDeterminants of skin color — The color of human skin is mainly determined by the two types of melanin, the black-brown eumelanin and the yellow-red pheomelanin. Other significant determinants are the capillary blood flow, chromophores such as carotene or lycopene, and the collagen content of the dermis. Eumelanin and pheomelanin are present in individual of all skin colors, but their ratio is highly variable and determines the hue of the skin [4]. Differences in the number, size, and aggregation of melanosomes within the melanocytes and keratinocytes, but not in the overall number of melanocytes, contribute to ethnic differences in skin color [5,6]. Darker skin types have a higher content of melanin, higher eumelanin-to-pheomelanin ratio, nonaggregated and larger melanosomes, and slower melanosome degradation within the keratinocytes [7]. Melanin — Melanin is produced by melanocytes, specialized cells of neural crest origin that reside in the basal layer of the epidermis. The biosynthesis of melanin occurs in lysosome-like organelles called melanosomes, which are transported to the cell periphery and transferred from the dendritic tips of the melanocytes to the surrounding keratinocytes [8]. Each melanocyte is associated with approximately 36 basal keratinocytes to form the so-called epidermal melanin unit. Melanin synthesis is triggered by the hydroxylation of L-phenylalanine to L-tyrosine or directly from L-tyrosine. Tyrosinase hydroxylates L-tyrosine to 3,4-L-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-DOPA), which further undergoes oxidation to dopaquinone. Thereafter, two main pathways diverge, leading to production of black-brown eumelanin and yellow-red pheomelanin. Melanin synthesis is regulated by multiple complex signaling pathways, including melanocyte-stimulating hormones (MSH)/cAMP and KIT [8].Genetic mutations affecting the pathways that regulate the differentiation and migration of melanocyte precursors in the neural crest or the proliferation and activity of mature melanocytes may be involved in the pathogenesis of hyperpigmentation associated with inherited syndromes [8]. Hypermelanosis — Skin hyperpigmentation is in most cases caused by increased biosynthesis and deposition of melanin in the epidermis and/or dermis. Epidermal hypermelanosis results from an excess of melanin in the basal and suprabasal layers of the skin due to increased melanin production either by an abnormally high number of melanocytes or by a normal melanocyte population. These abnormalities may be due to both acquired and genetic factors. The normal dermis does not contain melanin. Dermal hypermelanosis may develop through several mechanisms: ●Transfer of melanin from the epidermis to the dermis and accumulation within melanophages ("pigmentary incontinence"). This process is commonly observed in inflammatory skin diseases that involve a damage of the basal layer and/or the dermoepidermal junction. ●Production of melanin by ectopic dermal melanocytes. Examples of dermal melanocytosis are the nevus of Ota and nevus of Ito.●Binding of melanin to exogenous pigments deposited in the dermis. Other pigments — Cutaneous hyperpigmentation can be caused by the deposition in the dermis of endogenous or exogenous pigments, such as hemosiderin, iron, or heavy metals. Recurrent extravasation of red blood cells in the dermis leads to deposition of hemosiderin, resulting in a red-brown discoloration of the skin. Dermal hyperpigmentation mimicking dermal hypermelanosis can be caused by topical or systemic exposure to heavy metals (eg, silver, gold, mercury). Some metals, such as iron, may also stimulate melanogenesis, as observed in patients with hemochromatosis.PATIENT EVALUATION — The diagnosis of hyperpigmentation disorders may be challenging. In most cases, the initial patient evaluation involves a detailed family and personal medical history and a complete physical examination, which should include a careful search for additional cutaneous and extracutaneous signs and symptoms. Questions that may be useful for the evaluation of patients with hyperpigmentation disorders include [9]:●Is the disorder congenital or acquired? ●Is the disorder isolated or part of a syndrome?●Is the pigmentation localized or diffuse? ●Is the pigmentation well circumscribed or ill-defined? ●Does the pigmentation have a pattern (eg, linear, reticular)? ●Is the pigmentation associated with inflammation and/or prior cutaneous injury?●Is the pigmentation stable, progressing, or regressing?●Does the patient have concomitant systemic diseases?●Does the patient have a history of exposure to a new medication?History — A detailed medical history should be obtained from the patient to determine if the hyperpigmentation is related to an underlying disease. The possibility of drug-induced pigmentation must be kept in mind. Patients should also be questioned about occupational and or hobby-related exposure to chemicals that may cause hyperpigmentation.Investigation of the family history may be helpful to determine whether the disorder is acquired or inherited, and, in the latter case, what is the probable inheritance pattern [10]. However, although congenital or inherited hyperpigmentation disorders are often present at birth, history may be misleading, since parents may not have noted it for months or longer. The course of the disorder is also a useful parameter in the clinical diagnosis of hyperpigmentation disorders. Inherited hyperpigmentations are often stable, whereas most acquired forms show progression or regression.Skin examination — In all patients with hyperpigmentation disorders, a complete skin examination should be performed under visible light and Wood's light. Important clinical parameters include: ●Extent of the pigmentary abnormality (localized versus diffuse)●Color hue (shades of brown/black, slate-gray/blue)●Morphology of individual lesions ●Distribution (eg, sun-exposed areas, areas previously involved by inflammatory processes) ●Pattern (eg, linear, reticular, nonfigurate) A careful search for associated cutaneous and extracutaneous signs and symptoms may provide important clues to the diagnosis, particularly in patients with hyperpigmentation disorders associated with systemic diseases or genetic syndromes. Wood's light examination — Wood's light, also known as "black light," is ultraviolet A light with a peak emission at 365 nm [11]. The patient is examined in a darkened room with the light source held at 10 to 15 cm from the skin. Wood's light is helpful in determining whether the pigment deposition is predominantly epidermal, dermal, or mixed [12]. ●Epidermal hypermelanosis – Under natural light, epidermal hypermelanosis appears light brown to dark brown in color. The pigmentation, as well as the contrast between involved and uninvolved skin, is enhanced when viewed under a Wood's lamp. ●Dermal hypermelanosis – Under natural light, dermal hypermelanosis has a bluish or ashen gray hue with margins less defined than epidermal hypermelanosis. The pigmentation is not accentuated by the Wood's light. ●Mixed hypermelanosis – Mixed hypermelanosis appears light to dark brown under natural light, whereas Wood's light examination will show enhancement in some areas and none in others.Reflectance confocal microscopy — In vivo reflectance confocal microscopy is a technique that allows noninvasive imaging of the epidermis and papillary dermis at histologic resolution [13]. The confocal microscope emits a near-infrared light from a diode laser source focused on a microscopic skin target. As this light penetrates cellular structures with different refraction indexes, it is naturally reflected and then captured and recomposed by a computer software into a two-dimensional grayscale image [14,15].Reflectance confocal microscopy is not widely available and is mainly employed in research settings. However, it is a promising technique to diagnose and/or monitor treatment of hypo- and hyperpigmentation disorders without performing repeated biopsies [16,17].Skin biopsy — A skin biopsy for histopathologic evaluation is not routinely performed for the diagnosis of hyperpigmentation disorders. However, it may be necessary when the clinical diagnosis is uncertain. Standard stains (eg, hematoxylin and eosin, Fontana-Masson silver stain) and histochemical techniques (eg, Mart-1, Melan-A) are used to evaluate the number and localization of melanocytes and melanin granules in the epidermis and dermis. The main histopathologic findings in selected hyperpigmentation disorders are summarized in the table (table 1). ACQUIRED HYPERPIGMENTATION DISORDERSCircumscribed hyperpigmentationEphelides — Ephelides or freckles are small, well-demarcated hyperpigmented macules, usually 2 to 4 mm in diameter, that occur most frequently in individuals with red or blond hair and fair complexion (picture 1). They first appear during early childhood on sun-exposed skin and are most numerous on the face, dorsal hands, and upper trunk. Ephelides increase in number, size, and depth of pigmentation during the summer months and are smaller, lighter, and fewer in number in the winter.Ephelides are benign lesions and have no propensity for malignant transformation [18]. Histologically, there is a normal number of melanocytes with large melanosomes, resembling those seen in dark-skinned individuals.Treatment involves the use of sun-protective measures. Additional treatment is for cosmetic purposes only. Topical retinoids and depigmenting agents may lighten lesions to a minimal extent. Pigment-specific lasers and light-based therapy are additional therapeutic modalities [19]. (See "Laser and light therapy for cutaneous hyperpigmentation".)Lentigines — Lentigines are benign pigmented macules that result from increased activity of epidermal melanocytes. There are two major types of lentigines: simple lentigo and solar lentigo. ●Simple lentigines are usually small (<5 mm), darker than ephelides, and appear during childhood. They have a scattered distribution and do not show a predilection for sun-exposed areas. Multiple lentigines are a feature of numerous genetic disorders (table 2). ●Solar lentigines are tan to dark brown macules, 3 to 20 mm in size, that occur on sun exposed areas (eg, face, dorsal aspect of hands and forearms, upper chest, and upper back) in response to excessive or chronic sun exposure (picture 2). In younger individuals, they often appear after an acute sunburn. The differential diagnosis and management of lentigines is discussed elsewhere. (See "Benign pigmented skin lesions other than melanocytic nevi (moles)", section on 'Lentigo'.)Laugier-Hunziker syndrome — Laugier-Hunziker syndrome is an acquired, benign disorder presenting in adults with lentigines on the lips and buccal mucosa. Approximately one-half of the patients also have longitudinal melanonychia and macular pigmentation of the genitals [20]. Palms and soles are frequently involved. There are no underlying systemic abnormalities and no malignant predisposition. The diagnosis of Laugier-Hunziker syndrome is one of exclusion and is usually made after ruling out other causes of oral and labial hyperpigmentation, including physiologic pigmentation seen in dark-skinned individuals and inherited diseases associated with lentiginosis (eg, Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, LEOPARD syndrome). The absence of systemic symptoms such as fatigue, weight loss, cardiovascular, or gastrointestinal disorders, and negative findings in upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and colonoscopy support the diagnosis of Laugier-Hunziker syndrome. (See 'Genetic syndromes associated with lentiginosis' below.)No treatment is necessary. However, some patients may require the removal of pigmented lesions for cosmetic reasons. Cryosurgery, neodymium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet (Nd:YAG) lasers, and the Q-switched alexandrite laser have been used in single case reports [21-23]. (See "Laser and light therapy for cutaneous hyperpigmentation".)Becker's melanosis — Becker's melanosis, also called Becker's nevus, is a benign cutaneous hamartoma usually presenting in adolescents as a unilateral, hyperpigmented macule or slightly elevated plaque located on the shoulder or upper trunk (picture 3A-B). In one-half of the cases, there is an associated hypertrichosis. Becker nevus is discussed in greater detail elsewhere. (See "Benign pigmented skin lesions other than melanocytic nevi (moles)", section on 'Becker nevus'.)Maturational dyschromia — Darkening of facial skin tone is frequently seen in older individuals with darker skin types. Maturational dyschromia or maturational hyperpigmentation is a rarely used term that refers to a primary darkening of both mature and sun-exposed skin [24]. The onset is in adulthood and is not associated with prior inflammation or skin injury. The hyperpigmentation generally occurs on the lateral aspects of the face and also dorsal hands and feet as a result of chronic sun exposure (picture 4). (See "Photoaging".)Maturational dyschromia is a diagnosis of exclusion. It is most commonly confused with melasma, postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, or acanthosis nigricans. The differential diagnosis also includes photoallergic dermatitis and exogenous ochronosis. (See 'Exogenous ochronosis' below.)Treatment includes sun-protective measures and topical skin lightening agents. (See "Melasma", section on 'Skin lightening agents'.)Periorbital hyperpigmentation — Periorbital hyperpigmentation, also called idiopathic cutaneous hyperchromia of the orbital region, periorbital melanosis, dark circles, or infraorbital pigmentation is a common finding in otherwise healthy individuals [25]. It affects equally men and women and is more common in individuals with dark complexions [26]. A familial form has also been recognized, with variable clinical expression in different members of the family [27]. In familial cases, the hyperpigmentation usually starts during childhood in the lower eyelids and progresses with age to involve the entire periorbital area.The cause of periorbital hyperpigmentation is multifactorial. Contributing factors include genetic or constitutional pigmentation; dermal melanocytosis; postinflammatory hyperpigmentation; periorbital edema; excessive subcutaneous vascularity; thin, translucent lower eyelid skin overlying the orbicularis oculi muscle; or a shadow effect due to skin laxity and prominent tear trough [7,25,26]. Excessive sun exposure, drugs, hormonal causes, and extension of pigmentary demarcation lines may be additional contributing factors [28]. Histologically, there is an increase in dermal melanin and hemoglobin [29,30]. There are no therapies of proven efficacy for periorbital hyperpigmentation. Treatment should be directed to most apparent etiologic factor (eg, topical lightening agents for postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, soft tissue filler for prominent tear trough). However, topical skin lightening agents, chemical peels [31], lasers [32-34], autologous fat transplantation, fat grafting with and without blepharoplasty [35,36], and dermal fillers [37] have all been tried but none have provided long-term satisfactory treatment. (See "Melasma", section on 'Skin lightening agents'.)Melasma — Melasma is an acquired hyperpigmentation of the skin that typically affects the sun-exposed areas of the face, including the centrofacial, malar, and mandibular regions. It is most common in women with darker complexions who live in areas of intense ultraviolet radiation exposure [38]. The clinical features, diagnosis, and management of melasma are discussed in detail separately. (See "Melasma".) Nevus of Hori — Acquired bilateral nevus of Ota-like macules (ABNOM) or nevus of Hori is a common dermal melanocytic hyperpigmentation seen in Asian populations, primarily in young and middle-aged Chinese and Japanese women [39-41]. It is characterized by blue-gray to gray-brown macules primarily on the zygoma and less often on the forehead, temples, upper eyelids, and root and alae of the nose. Although nevus of Hori shares histologic similarities with nevus of Ota, it can be clinically distinguished from nevus of Ota by late onset in adulthood, bilateral presentation, speckled or confluent distribution, and lack of ocular and mucosal involvement. The differential diagnosis includes melasma, lentigines, and ephelides. (See "Melasma" and "Benign pigmented skin lesions other than melanocytic nevi (moles)".)Laser therapy alone or in combination with chemical peels is the major treatment modality for nevus of Hori [40]. Pigment-selective lasers and their combinations (eg, 532 nm Q-switched Nd:YAG laser (QSNY) followed by a 1064 nm QSNY, or scanned carbon dioxide laser or intense pulsed light with a Q-switched ruby laser) have been successfully used in small series of patients [42-46]. Adverse effects of treatment include postinflammatory hypo- and hyperpigmentation. (See "Laser and light therapy for cutaneous hyperpigmentation".)Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation — Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation (PIH) is a common reactive hypermelanosis that develops as a sequela of a variety of insults to the skin, including inflammatory diseases, chemical or physical injuries, or trauma [47-49]. The pathogenesis of PIH is incompletely understood. It may result from the melanocyte-stimulating properties of inflammatory mediators such as leukotrienes, thromboxanes, prostaglandins, interleukin 1 and 6, tumor necrosis factor-alpha, and nitric oxide [49,50]. PIH presents with hyperpigmented macules and patches in the same area involved by the preceding inflammation or trauma (picture 5A-B). The color varies from light brown to slate-gray or black, depending upon the skin color and location of melanin deposition (epidermal or dermal). Patients with darker skin types are particularly predisposed to PIH. The diagnosis is usually clinical. In difficult or uncertain cases, a skin biopsy for histopathologic examination may be necessary. Histology shows increased melanin content in keratinocytes and melanophages in the dermis.PIH usually resolves spontaneously over time, but may be permanent. The time to resolution varies from months to years and is influenced by many factors, including the patient's baseline skin tone, the type, intensity, and duration of the injury, and the patient's sun exposure habits. Several treatments have been tried for PIH, including sunscreen and topical skin lightening agents, such as hydroquinone, azelaic acid, kojic acid, retinoids, and vitamin C [49,51]. Topical skin lightening agents, alone or in combination, may be useful for PIH limited to the epidermis. However, the efficacy of skin lightening agents for PIH has not been evaluated in randomized trials. Their use is based upon clinical experience and indirect evidence of efficacy in the treatment of melasma. (See "Melasma", section on 'First-line therapies'.)Chemical peels and laser- and light-based therapies should be used with caution, especially in patients with darker skin phototypes, since they can induce skin irritation and worsening of PIH. (See "Melasma", section on 'Second-line therapies'.)Riehl's melanosis — Riehl's melanosis or pigmented contact dermatitis is a dermal melanosis involving the face and neck caused by repeated contact with cosmetic ingredients [52]. A mild erythema and pruritus typically precede the development of a diffuse or reticulated hyperpigmentation (picture 6). The involved skin appears brown, brown-gray, or blue-gray depending upon the causal agent, depth of pigment deposition, and background skin color. Histologically, there is vacuolar degeneration of the basal layer of the epidermis resulting in pigment incontinence in the dermis [53]. The papillary dermis contains an infiltrate of lymphocytes and macrophages containing large amounts of melanin.The diagnosis is based upon the clinical appearance and history of cosmetic use. Patch testing to standard series, cosmetic series, fragrance series, and additional ingredients found in patients' personal products may be helpful in identifying the offending agent. Photo-patch testing may be useful in some patients. When results are equivocal or negative, provocative use test or repeated open application test (ROAT) can be administered [29]. (See "Patch testing".)The differential diagnosis includes melasma, nevus of Hori, photosensitivity reactions, and berloque dermatitis (phytophotodermatitis). (See "Melasma" and "Clinical features and diagnosis of allergic contact dermatitis".)Treatment involves complete avoidance of the suspected allergen. Sun-protective measures, skin lightening agents, and chemical peels can accelerate the resolution of pigmentation changes. Erythrose péribuccale pigmentaire de Brocq — A rare form of facial hyperpigmentation and probably a variant of Riehl's melanosis is the so-called "erythrose péribuccale pigmentaire de Brocq" or "erythrosis pigmentosa mediofacialis." It is characterized by diffuse, symmetric red-brown pigmentation around the mouth with sparing of the vermillion border [54]. It may extend to the forehead, temples, and angles of the jaw. Histologic examination shows orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, no specific inflammatory epidermal reaction pattern, and pigment incontinence with melanophages in the upper dermis. Enlarged follicular openings containing keratin plugs and often Demodex folliculorum have also been noted [55,56]. The pigmentation tends to be persistent. Treatment is difficult and involves sun avoidance and the use of skin lightening agents [57]. Erythromelanosis follicularis faciei et colli — Erythromelanosis follicularis faciei et colli is a rare clinical variant of keratosis pilaris primarily seen in adolescents and young adults [58]. It presents with a gradually progressive, reddish-brown pigmentation surmounted by small follicular papules (picture 7) [54]. The pigmentation involves the preauricular areas and extends to the cheeks and sides of the neck. Classic keratosis pilaris lesions are often present on the trunk. (See "Keratosis pilaris".)There is no effective treatment for erythromelanosis follicularis faciei et colli. Topical retinoids, topical tacalcitol, hydroquinone, and laser therapy have been used in a few patients with temporary improvement [58-60]. Complete regression is difficult to achieve and relapse is common. Post-chikungunya fever pigmentation — Chikungunya fever is a mosquito-borne viral illness endemic to West Africa that causes acute febrile polyarthralgia and arthritis. Post-chikungunya fever pigmentation of the face has been noted in India since 2005 [54,61]. Other mucocutaneous manifestations are common, including a patchy or diffuse maculopapular rash that may involve the face, intertrigo-like lesions, vesicobullous lesions, and aphthous ulcerations and gingivitis [62,63]. (See "Chikungunya fever".)Histologic examination of hyperpigmented lesions shows increased basal pigmentation, pigmentary incontinence, and melanophages [54,61,63]. These findings support the hypothesis that the hypermelanosis associated with chikungunya fever is a form of postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. (See 'Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation' above.)Post-chikungunya fever facial pigmentation occurs in all age groups and presents as asymptomatic brownish-black freckle-like macules involving the centrofacial area or diffuse pigmentation of the face [64]. Other patterns of pigmentation include a melasma-like pigmentation of the face, exacerbation of a preexistent melasma, periorbital melanosis, and a flagellate pattern on the trunk and extremities. Lesions may persist for three to six months after the infection [61]. Treatment involves sun avoidance and the use of topical corticosteroids [61].Smoker's melanosis — Smoker's melanosis is characterized by irregular macular hyperpigmentation of the oral mucosa secondary to tobacco smoking [65-67]. It may be due to the stimulating effect of nicotine on the melanocytes located in the basal layer of the oral mucosa. Lesions consist of brown patches most commonly located on the mandibular anterior gingiva in cigarette smokers, and buccal mucosa in pipe smokers [66]. In those who engage in reverse smoking (smoking from the lit end), pigmentation changes are most common on the hard palate. The diagnosis is usually clinical. However, a biopsy for histopathologic examination may be warranted if the diagnosis is unclear or the lesion is suspicious for malignancy. The differential diagnosis includes physiologic pigmentation (mucosal melanosis) in dark-skinned individuals, amalgam tattoo, drug-induced hyperpigmentation, Addison's disease, melanoacanthoma, and mucosal melanoma.There are no treatments for smoker's melanosis. Lesions tend to resolve spontaneously over a period of several years of smoking discontinuation [68]. Exogenous ochronosis — Exogenous ochronosis is a rare condition resulting from the deposition of homogentisic acid in the dermis following a prolonged exposure to a variety of topical products used in skin lightening agents such as hydroquinone, resorcinol, phenol, mercury, and picric acid [69,70]. The highest incidence is reported in African countries, due to the widespread use of these agents [71,72]. Exogenous ochronosis presents as an asymptomatic localized, symmetric blue-gray discoloration of the skin with characteristic hyperchromic, pinpoint, caviar-like papules in photo-exposed regions (eg, face, sides and back of the neck, back, and extensor surfaces of limbs (picture 8)). The diagnosis often requires a skin biopsy, since exogenous ochronosis can be easily confused with postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, melasma, and pigmented contact dermatitis (Riehl's dermatitis). Histology shows a microscopic deposition of ochre-colored pigment in the papillary dermis, resembling the endogenous ochronosis associated with alkaptonuria [73]. (See "Disorders of tyrosine metabolism", section on 'Alkaptonuria'.)There is no effective treatment for exogenous ochronosis. Dermabrasion, CO2 laser, chemical peels, Q-switched Nd:YAG laser, and fractional carbon dioxide laser have been used in a small number of patients with inconsistent results [69,74,75].Diffuse hyperpigmentationAssociated with endocrine and metabolic diseasesAddison's disease — Addison's disease or primary adrenal insufficiency is a clinical syndrome caused by glucocorticoid, mineralocorticoid and, in women, androgen deficiency [76]. Signs and symptoms of chronic adrenal insufficiency include malaise, fatigue, hypotension, anorexia, weight loss, and hyperpigmentation. (See "Clinical manifestations of adrenal insufficiency in adults".)The diffuse hyperpigmentation of Addison's disease is caused by the melanocyte stimulating hormone (MSH)-like effect of elevated plasma levels of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). The pigmentation is typically diffuse, with accentuation in sun-exposed areas, flexures, palmar and plantar creases, and areas of pressure or friction (picture 9).Normally hyperpigmented skin areas, such as the nipples and genitals, become darker. The buccal, conjunctival, and genital mucosa may also be involved (picture 10). The nails and hair may also darken (picture 11). (See "Clinical manifestations of adrenal insufficiency in adults", section on 'Hyperpigmentation'.)The evaluation of the patient with suspected Addison's disease involves the measurement of basal serum cortisol and plasma ACTH. The finding of low basal cortisol and elevated plasma ACTH is diagnostic of primary adrenocortical insufficiency. (See "Diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency in adults".)The hyperpigmentation usually fades after a few months of adequate glucocorticoid therapy, due to cornification and desquamation of hyperpigmented basal keratinocytes. Fading of hair and nails takes longer because the pigmented part of the hair shaft and nail grows out slowly. Diabetic dermopathy — Diabetic dermopathy, also called shin spots or pigmented pretibial patches, occurs in approximately one-half of diabetic patients, most often in patients with microangiopathic complications [77,78]. It presents with multiple asymptomatic, round, dull red to pink papules or plaques predominantly located on the pretibial skin. Lesions evolve in one to two weeks to well-circumscribed, atrophic, brown macules and patches, often with fine scale (picture 12). The diagnosis of diabetic dermopathy is clinical. A skin biopsy is not routinely done. If performed, it shows nonspecific findings, including edema of the epidermis and papillary dermis, red blood cell extravasation, and a mild perivascular lymphohistiocytic infiltrate [77]. Older lesions show epidermal atrophy and scattered hemosiderin deposits. There is no treatment for diabetic dermopathy. The lesions may resolve spontaneously over time or persist indefinitely.Acanthosis nigricans — Acanthosis nigricans is a common disorder characterized by hyperpigmented, velvety plaques located in intertriginous areas such as the axillae, groin, and posterior neck (picture 13). Histologically, it is characterized by hyperkeratosis, epidermal papillomatosis, and slight, variable acanthosis, with normal melanocyte density [77]. There is no melanin deposition and the hyperpigmentation is mainly due to hyperkeratosis. Acanthosis nigricans occurs in approximately 40 percent of patients with diabetes mellitus type 2. However, it may also occur in other endocrine and metabolic disorders, most of which are associated with insulin resistance. Rarely, acanthosis nigricans may be a paraneoplastic syndrome.The etiology, clinical manifestations, diagnosis, and treatment of acanthosis nigricans are discussed in detail separately. (See "Acanthosis nigricans".) Hyperthyroidism — Cutaneous changes associated with thyrotoxicosis include a localized or generalized hyperpigmentation with a distribution similar to that seen in Addison's disease (eg, creases of palms and soles, buccal mucosa). The hyperpigmentation is thought to be caused by increased release of pituitary ACTH in response to increased cortisol degradation [79]. (See "Overview of the clinical manifestations of hyperthyroidism in adults", section on 'Metabolic / endocrine'.)Hemochromatosis — Hereditary hemochromatosis is an autosomal recessive disorder in which mutations in the HFE gene cause increased intestinal iron absorption and abnormal accumulation of iron in the liver, pancreas, and other organs [80-82]. Clinical manifestations include liver disease, skin pigmentation, diabetes mellitus, arthropathy, and cardiac enlargement. (See "Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of hereditary hemochromatosis".)A generalized darkening of the skin is seen in approximately 70 percent of patients. The hyperpigmentation is due to a combination of hemosiderin deposition, which causes a diffuse, slate-gray discoloration of the skin and increased melanin production. In patients with suspected hemochromatosis, screening tests include the measurement of serum transferrin saturation and ferritin. Genetic testing for HFE mutations (C282Y, H63D) should be performed in patients with elevated transferrin saturation and/or elevated ferritin to confirm the diagnosis. (See "Approach to the patient with suspected iron overload" and "Screening for hereditary hemochromatosis".)Drug-induced — A wide variety of drugs and chemicals can lead to cutaneous hyperpigmentation [83,84]. An increased production of melanin and/or the deposition of drug complexes or metals in the dermis are responsible for the skin discoloration. The drugs most often causing hyperpigmentation and associated clinical features are summarized in the table (table 3). The hyperpigmentation usually resolves with discontinuation of the offending agent, but the course may be prolonged months to years.Erythema dyschromicum perstans — Erythema dyschromicum perstans (EDP), also called ashy dermatosis or dermatosis cenicienta, is an uncommon, slowly progressive dermatosis characterized by hyperpigmented macules of variable size and shape of an ashen-gray color [85]. The majority of patients with this disorder are from Latin America. EDP is usually seen in young adults, but it may also occur in children [86].The etiology of EDP is unknown. There are isolated reports of EDP associated with exposure to medications (most commonly, benzodiazepines and penicillin ), radiographic contrast media, pesticides, endocrinopathies, Trichuris trichiura (whipworm) infestation, and HIV infection [47,87,88]. However, in most cases a cause or trigger cannot be identified. HLA-DR4 allele may be a risk factor for EDP in Mexican patients [89]. Histologic examination of the active border of the lesions shows vacuolar alterations of the basal layer with occasional necrotic keratinocytes and colloid bodies resembling lichen planus [90]. In the papillary dermis, there is a mild to moderate perivascular infiltrate of lymphocytes and histiocytes with melanophages. Based upon these findings, it has been hypothesized that EDP may represent a cell-mediated immune reaction to an ingestant, contact allergen, or microorganism [85,91]. EDP presents with slate-gray to blue-brown oval, circular, or irregularly shaped macules and patches that develop gradually in a symmetric distribution (picture 14A-B). The long axis of the lesions may follow the skin cleavage lines. Early lesions may have a thin, raised, and erythematous border. Lesions typically involve the trunk, but they may spread to the neck, upper extremities, and face. EDP is usually asymptomatic, but mild pruritus may occur. EDP is a difficult diagnosis. It may share clinical and histologic features with other entities, including lichen planus pigmentosus, lichenoid drug eruption (picture 15), infectious diseases (eg, leprosy, pinta), and postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. (See "Lichen planus" and "Lichenoid drug eruption (drug-induced lichen planus)".)There are no effective therapies for EDP. Topical agents such as corticosteroids and hydroquinone are usually of limited benefit. Oral corticosteroids, antibiotics (eg, doxycycline), antimalarials, isoniazid, griseofulvin, and UV light therapy have been tried with variable results. Successful treatment with dapsone [92] and clofazimine [93,94] has been reported in a small number of patients.The disease is slowly progressive and persistent. Spontaneous resolution over months to years has been reported in children [95].Lichen planus pigmentosus — Lichen planus pigmentosus (LPP) is a rare variant of lichen planus that occurs predominantly in individuals with darker skin phototypes [96]. It generally affects young to middle-aged adults, especially those from India, Latin America, and the Middle East. (See "Lichen planus".)The etiology is unknown. Photodistribution suggests that UV light may play a role in the pathogenesis of LPP. Mustard oil (which contains allyl isothiocyanate, a potential photosensitizer) and amla oil have been suggested as possible inciting agents [97]. LPP typically presents with oval or irregularly shaped brown to gray-brown macules and patches in sun-exposed areas, including the forehead, temples, and neck. It may also occur on the trunk and in intertriginous areas (lichen planus pigmentosus inversus). Lesions are usually symmetric but can present in a unilateral, linear fashion. In contrast with erythema dyschromicum perstans, early LPP lesions lack an erythematous border. (See 'Erythema dyschromicum perstans' above.) In some patients, typical lesions of lichen planus may also be present [97]. LPP is usually asymptomatic, but some patients report mild pruritus or burning. The diagnosis of LPP is based upon clinical and histologic findings. Histology shows hyperkeratosis, vacuolar cell degeneration in the basal layer with apoptotic keratinocytes, a band-like dermal lymphocytic infiltrate with pigment incontinence and melanophages. The differential diagnosis includes lichen planus, erythema dyschromicum perstans, melasma, lichenoid drug eruptions, and postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. LPP is a chronic, relapsing disorder with exacerbations and remissions. Treatment options include topical corticosteroids, topical calcineurin inhibitors, and skin lightening agents [98]. Actinic lichen planus — Actinic lichen planus (ALP), also known as lichen planus tropicus, is a rare photodistributed variant of lichen planus [99]. (See "Lichen planus".)ALP is most commonly seen in children and young adults from the Middle East, East Africa, or India [100,101]. Its pathogenesis is unknown, but exposure to ultraviolet radiation appears to have a precipitating effect. ALP usually presents as red-brown plaques with an annular configuration, but melasma-like hyperpigmented patches have also been observed [91]. Lesions are typically photodistributed, involving the forehead, face, neck, and dorsal aspect of upper extremities. Lesions typically appear and are exacerbated during the summer months and may improve spontaneously in winter. The diagnosis of ALP is based upon clinical and histologic features. On histology, lesions show the typical findings of lichen planus (eg, vacuolar degeneration of the basal cell layer, dyskeratotic cells, band-like lymphocytic dermal infiltrate) with marked pigmentary incontinence.The differential diagnosis of ALP includes discoid lupus erythematosus, polymorphous light eruption, melasma, and granuloma annulare. (See "Mucocutaneous manifestations of systemic lupus erythematosus", section on 'Discoid lupus erythematosus' and "Photosensitivity disorders (photodermatoses): Clinical manifestations, diagnosis, and treatment", section on 'Polymorphous light eruption' and "Melasma" and "Granuloma annulare".)Multiple therapies in combination with sunscreens have been tried in individual patients with ALP with varying outcomes. Therapies include photoprotection, topical and intralesional corticosteroids, antimalarials, acitretin, and cyclosporin [100,102-104]. There is a single case report of successful treatment of ALP with intense pulsed light [105].Primary cutaneous amyloidosis — Amyloidosis encompasses a spectrum of disorders characterized by the deposition of amyloid fibrils (insoluble aggregates of misfolded proteins, some of which are constituents of plasma) within the skin and other tissues. Primary cutaneous amyloidosis is a form of localized, organ-specific amyloidosis in which the amyloid deposition is limited to the skin. It may be a feature of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A and pachyonychia congenita [106,107]. (See "Overview of amyloidosis" and "Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2", section on 'Cutaneous lichen amyloidosis'.)The pathogenesis of primary cutaneous amyloidosis is not fully understood. Prolonged friction, genetic predisposition, Epstein-Barr virus infection, and sun exposure have been proposed as possible etiologic factors, but their role remains inconclusive [108-110]. The origin of the precursor protein in primary cutaneous amyloidosis is also unclear. One hypothesis is that focal epidermal damage and filamentous degeneration of keratinocytes is followed by apoptosis and conversion of filamentous masses into amyloid in the papillary dermis [111].The most common types of primary cutaneous amyloidosis are macular amyloidosis, lichen amyloidosis, and biphasic amyloidosis [112]. ●Macular amyloidosis – Macular amyloidosis presents with hyperpigmented, pruritic patches, exhibiting either a confluent configuration or a characteristic ripple pattern with parallel bands or ridges of hyperpigmentation (picture 16A-B). The rippled pattern can be best appreciated by stretching the skin. The most common site of involvement is the upper back, especially over the scapular area, followed by the extensor surfaces of the extremities. ●Lichen amyloidosis – Lichen amyloidosis usually presents with persistent, pruritic papules and plaques on the shins or other extensor surfaces of the extremities (picture 17A-D). The initial lesions are discrete, firm, scaly, skin-colored, or hyperpigmented papules, which later coalesce into plaques, often with a rippled pattern. Lesions are usually unilateral at onset, but can develop into a bilateral, symmetrical distribution. ●Biphasic amyloidosis – In some patients, both macular and lichen amyloidosis can be present, suggesting that the two forms may represent ends of a clinical spectrum.●Amyloidosis cutis dyschromica – Amyloidosis cutis dyschromica is an exceedingly rare type of primary cutaneous amyloidosis [113]. It is characterized by reticular hyperpigmentation with hypopigmented macules distributed over nearly all of the body.The diagnosis of cutaneous amyloidosis is based upon the clinical presentation and histopathologic examination of a skin biopsy. Histology shows hyperkeratosis, necrotic keratinocytes in the basal layer, and melanophages as well as amorphous eosinophilic material (amyloid) deposits in the upper dermis. There is no effective treatment for cutaneous amyloidosis. Several topical and systemic therapies have been tried with inconsistent results, including topical and intralesional corticosteroids, topical calcineurin inhibitors [114], systemic retinoids [115], thalidomide [116], cyclosporine [117], low-dose cyclophosphamide, and narrowband UVB or psoralen plus ultraviolet A (PUVA) phototherapy [118]. Cronkhite-Canada syndrome — Cronkhite-Canada syndrome is a rare, noninherited disorder characterized by polyposis of the digestive tract associated with variable anomalies of ectodermal tissues, including diffuse, non-scarring alopecia, nail dystrophy (picture 18), and lentigines of the buccal mucosa, face, hands, and feet [119]. About two-thirds of the patients are of Japanese descent [120]. The disease typically manifests in the sixth decade of life. Presenting symptoms include diarrhea, weight loss, nausea, vomiting, hypogeusia, and anorexia. A diffuse polyposis is present throughout the gastrointestinal tract. Complications include protein-losing enteropathy, gastrointestinal bleeding, intussusception, and prolapse.Cronkhite-Canada syndrome is a progressive disease with variable course and poor prognosis. Regardless of therapy, mortality rate exceeds 50 percent. (See "Approach to the patient with colonic polyps", section on 'Cronkhite-Canada syndrome'.) Erythema ab igne — Erythema ab igne is a reticular erythematous pigmented dermatosis resulting from repeated exposures to moderate heat or infrared radiation. Once common among people who sat near open fires or stoves, it is infrequently seen after the introduction of central heating. However, it is still seen in relation to occupational exposure to heat sources (foundry workers, bakers), use of hot water bottles, heating pads or blankets (picture 19A-C), heated car seats, and among laptop users who hold computers on their thighs [121-123].Erythema ab igne can occur at any site, more often in an asymmetrical distribution, and is usually asymptomatic. The early skin changes usually clear spontaneously in several weeks to months, after the removal of the heat source from the skin. However, longstanding lesions may be associated with permanent hyperpigmentation (picture 19A-C). (See "Approach to the patient with macular skin lesions", section on 'Erythema ab igne'.)Terra firma-forme dermatosis — Terra firma-forme dermatosis is an acquired, idiopathic condition characterized by retention hyperkeratosis, which results in the formation of dirt-like plaques despite normal hygiene. It is relatively common and most often occurs in children [124].Lesions typically involve the neck, ankle (posterior to the medial or lateral malleolus), and face, but may also occur on other body areas. Diagnosis and treatment can be achieved by removing lesions with gentle isopropyl alcohol swabbing, with once a week application as prophylaxis.CONGENITAL AND INHERITED HYPERPIGMENTATION DISORDERSCircumscribed hyperpigmentationCongenital dermal melanocytosis — Congenital dermal melanocytosis is a group of hyperpigmentation disorders characterized by the presence of melanin-producing melanocytes in the dermis. They are most commonly seen in Asian populations and include the nevus of Ito (picture 20), nevus of Ota (picture 21), and the so-called Mongolian spots (picture 22). The congenital dermal melanocytoses are discussed separately. (See "Benign pigmented skin lesions other than melanocytic nevi (moles)", section on 'Dermal melanocytoses' and "Benign skin and scalp lesions in the newborn and young infant", section on 'Congenital dermal melanocytosis (Mongolian spot)'.)Café-au-lait-macules — Café-au-lait-macules are sharply demarcated, hyperpigmented macules or patches that are typically two to three shades darker than the normal, uninvolved skin (picture 23). They vary in size from a few millimeters to more than 10 cm and can occur anywhere on the body. (See "Benign pigmented skin lesions other than melanocytic nevi (moles)", section on 'Café-au-lait macule'.)Café-au-lait-macules are often present at birth or appear in the first months of life. Isolated lesions are common and usually have no clinical significance. In contrast, multiple café-au-lait-macules may represent the cutaneous marker of underlying genetic disorders such as neurofibromatosis type 1 and McCune-Albright syndrome. (See "Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1): Pathogenesis, clinical features, and diagnosis" and "Definition, etiology, and evaluation of precocious puberty", section on 'McCune-Albright syndrome'.) Café-au-lait macules are difficult to treat. Partial clearance may be achieved with laser treatment, but recurrence is common [19]. (See "Laser and light therapy for cutaneous hyperpigmentation".) Nevus spilus — Nevus spilus, also called speckled lentiginous nevus, is a hyperpigmented macular, patch-type lesion with superimposed darker brown macules and papules (picture 24). The darker macules and papules may consist of junctional, compound, Spitz, atypical, or blue nevi. (See "Congenital melanocytic nevi", section on 'Speckled lentiginous nevus'.)Diffuse linear hyperpigmentationPigmentary demarcation lines — The color of skin normally exhibits variation in hue and intensity at various sites of the body [125]. In all skin types, the dorsal skin surfaces are relatively more pigmented than the ventral surfaces. Pigmentary demarcation lines, also known as Futcher or Voigt lines, are a frequent finding particularly in dark-skinned individuals. They are symmetric, bilateral, and are present from infancy to adulthood. Eight types of pigmentary demarcation lines (A to H) have been described [126]:●Type A – Lateral aspect of upper anterior portion of arms, across the pectoral area (picture 25A-B)●Type B – Posterior medial portion of lower limb●Type C – Vertical hypopigmentation line in pre- and parasternal areas●Type D – Posterior medial area of spine ●Type E – Bilateral aspect of chest, from the mid-third of clavicle to periareolar skin●Type F – A straight or curved convex line sharply demarcating a relatively darker zone from a light area over the face; a V-shaped hyperpigmented line between the malar prominence and the temple●Type G – W-shaped hyperpigmented lines between the malar prominence and the temple●Type H – Linear bands of hyperpigmentation from the angle of the mouth to the lateral aspects of the chinType A or Futcher lines are the most common type. They appear as sharp, easily recognizable lines located on the lateral aspect of the anterior portion of the upper arm, delineating the contrast in depth of color between the lateral and medial side of the arm (picture 25A). Incontinentia pigmenti — Incontinentia pigmenti, also known as Bloch-Sulzberger syndrome (MIM #308300), is an X-linked dominant multisystem disease that is usually lethal in males. It presents in newborns with linear papules and vesicles (picture 26A-B).Within weeks or months, these lesions progress to verrucous streaks, which typically resolve leaving streaks of hyperpigmentation (picture 27A-B). At three to six months of age, hyperpigmented whorls and swirls appear along Blaschko lines (picture 28). By the second or third decade of life or sooner, the hyperpigmented whorls may gradually become hypopigmented and may leave subtle atrophy. Incontinentia pigmenti is discussed in greater detail elsewhere. (See "The genodermatoses", section on 'Incontinentia pigmenti' and "Vesiculobullous and pustular lesions in the newborn", section on 'Incontinentia pigmenti'.)Linear and whorled nevoid hypermelanosis — Linear and whorled nevoid hypermelanosis (LWNH) is a rare disorder characterized by hyperpigmented macules in streaky configuration along the lines of Blaschko, mainly located on the trunk and limbs (picture 29A-B) [127,128]. The pigmentation is present at birth or appears in the first few weeks of life, progresses for one to two years, and then stabilizes. In some patients hypo- and hyperpigmented macules coexist. There are isolated reports of associated extracutaneous abnormalities, involving mostly the central nervous system, musculoskeletal system, and heart. The presence of genetic mosaicism has been documented in a few patients (mosaic trisomy 7, 14, 18, 20, and X-chromosomal mosaicism) [129-131]. The diagnosis is clinical. Histology is nonspecific and shows increased pigmentation of the basal layer with prominent melanocytes and variable presence of pigmentary incontinence. The differential diagnosis includes the pigmented stage of incontinentia pigmenti, hypomelanosis of Ito, and epidermal nevus. (See "The genodermatoses", section on 'Incontinentia pigmenti' and "Epidermal nevus and epidermal nevus syndrome".)Diffuse reticular hyperpigmentationDowling-Degos disease — Dowling-Degos disease (DDD), also known as reticulate pigmented anomaly of flexures, is a rare autosomal dominant genodermatosis associated in approximately one-half of the cases with loss-of-function mutations in the gene that encodes keratin 5, KRT5 [132]. Mutations in POGLUT1, which encodes an O-glucosyltransferase 1 involved in the Notch signaling pathway, have been found in affected individuals who do not have mutations in KRT5 [133,134]. The disease has been reported worldwide and affects both genders equally. Onset is typically during the third to fourth decade of life. DDD is characterized by an acquired reticular hyperpigmentation that begins in the axillae and groin and later involves other body folds, including intergluteal and inframammary folds, neck, and inner aspects of the arms and thighs (picture 30A-B). Associated features include comedone-like lesions on the back or neck, pitted perioral or facial scars, and epidermoid cysts [135]. Pruritus is a common accompanying symptom.The diagnosis is based upon the clinical features and the examination of a skin biopsy. Histology shows increased pigmentation of the basal layer and finger-like rete ridges with thinning of the suprapapillary epithelium. The differential diagnosis includes a group of related genodermatoses with reticular pigmentation, including Haber's syndrome, Galli-Galli disease, and reticulate acropigmentation of Kitamura. (See 'Reticulate acropigmentation of Kitamura' below.)●Haber's syndrome is characterized by a photosensitive rosacea-like facial eruption, keratotic papules, prominent comedones, pitted scars, and reticulate hyperpigmentation on the trunk, proximal extremities, and axillae. ●Galli-Galli disease has the same clinical and histologic features of DDD, with the exception of the presence of suprabasal non-dyskeratotic acantholysis on histopathology.There are no effective treatments for DDD. Topical retinoids, skin lightening agents, and laser therapy have been used in a limited number of patients with varying success [136,137].Reticulate acropigmentation of Kitamura — Reticulate acropigmentation of Kitamura (RAK) is a rare genodermatosis characterized by atrophic, hyperpigmented macules with an initial acral distribution. A mutation in the ADAM10 gene encoding a zinc metalloproteinase has been identified in a RAK family [138]. RAK has been reported worldwide, but the majority of cases are from Japan. The disease presents in childhood or adolescence with hyperpigmented, slightly depressed macules, often in a reticulate pattern, on the dorsum of the hands and feet. The distinguishing element of this disorder is the atrophic appearance of the lesions. During adulthood, the macules may darken and spread to other sites. Associated findings are pits on the palms, soles, and dorsal aspect of phalanges as well as breaks in palms and sole dermatoglyphics. Histologically, the hyperpigmented macules show epidermal atrophy and elongated rete ridges that contain increased melanin. The differential diagnosis of RAK includes other diseases presenting with reticular or punctate hyperpigmentation, such as dyskeratosis congenita, dyschromatosis universalis hereditaria, Franceschetti-Jadassohn's syndrome, and Dowling-Degos disease. Overlapping cases of RAK and Dowling-Degos disease have been reported [139].There are no effective therapies for RAK. Topical azelaic acid has been successfully used in a single case report [140].Naegeli-Franceschetti-Jadassohn syndrome — Naegeli–Franceschetti–Jadassohn syndrome (NFJS) is a rare autosomal dominant form of ectodermal dysplasia caused by heterozygous mutations in the KRT14 gene [141,142]. Clinical features include reticular hyperpigmentation of the skin, palmoplantar keratoderma, absence of dermatoglyphs, and reduced sweating. The hyperpigmentation appears in early childhood, increases during the first 10 years of life, and begins to fade around puberty. NFJS is closely related to dermatopathia pigmentosa reticularis (MIM #125595), a rare inherited disorder characterized by the triad of reticulate hyperpigmentation, noncicatricial alopecia, and onychodystrophy. Variable features include adermatoglyphia, hypohidrosis or hyperhidrosis, and palmoplantar hyperkeratosis [143]. Dyskeratosis congenita — Dyskeratosis congenita (DC) is an inherited bone marrow failure syndrome associated with characteristic mucocutaneous features and an increased risk of developing several malignancies, in particular, squamous cell carcinoma (especially mucosal), acute myelogenous leukemia, and Hodgkin disease [144].DC is inherited in an X-linked recessive fashion, but autosomal recessive and dominant forms also have been reported. It is caused by mutations in the DKC1 gene encoding the protein dyskerin, which is involved in telomerase stabilization and maintenance [145]. Telomerase dysfunction leads to chromosome instability and likely plays a role in tumorigenesis. The mucocutaneous manifestations of DC include (picture 31):●A lacy reticulated pattern of hyperpigmentation involving primarily the neck, upper chest, and upper arms, which develops during the first decade of life. ●Nail dystrophy manifesting as longitudinal ridging, splitting, and early pterygium. ●Teeth anomalies, including malformed, missing, or aberrant spacing (picture 32). ●Leukoplakia of the oral mucosa, most often involving the tongue (picture 33).DC is discussed in detail separately. (See "Inherited aplastic anemia in children and adolescents", section on 'Dyskeratosis congenita'.) Dyschromatosis symmetrica hereditaria — Dyschromatosis symmetrica hereditaria is characterized by small, irregular hyper- and hypopigmented macules on the dorsal aspects of hands and feet [146]. It is caused by mutations in the DSRAD gene encoding an adenosine deaminase and shows an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern [147]. Most cases are reported from East Asia (Japan, Korea, China), but the disorder has also been observed in European, Afro-Caribbean, and Indian individuals [148]. The majority of patients develop hyper- and hypopigmented macules by the age of six. Histologically, the hyperpigmented macules show an increased melanin content in basal keratinocytes, whereas the hypopigmented macules demonstrate a decreased density of DOPA-positive melanocytes. The lesions typically increase in size and number until adolescence and then stabilize and persist indefinitely. There is no effective treatment for dyschromatosis symmetrica hereditaria. There are isolated reports of cosmetic improvement with skin grafting techniques and laser therapy [149].Dyschromatosis universalis hereditaria — Dyschromatosis universalis hereditaria (DUH) is a rare disorder characterized by hypo- and hyperpigmented macules in a generalized distribution [150]. It is most frequently seen in Asian countries, particularly in Japan and India [151]. DUH is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion with variable penetrance, but there are rare reports of autosomal recessive transmission [152,153]. Genome-wide linkage analysis studies indicate that DUH is caused by mutations in the ABCB6 (ATP-binding cassette subfamily B, member 6) gene [154,155].Hypo- and hyperpigmented macules usually appear in the first years of life on the hands and then extend to the face, trunk, and extremities. They may involve the palms and soles but generally spare the oral mucosa. Lesions on the face may resemble ephelides and/or lentigines. DUH may be associated with abnormalities of dermal connective tissue and nerve tissue [151]. Other associations include short stature and deafness [156]; photosensitivity [157]; and epilepsy [158]. The diagnosis is clinical. Histology is nonspecific and shows focal increase or decrease in melanin content of the basal layer in the hyperpigmented and hypopigmented macules, respectively. The differential diagnosis of DUH includes xeroderma pigmentosum, amyloidosis cutis dyschromica, and exposure to chemicals such as diphenylcyclopropenone and monobenzyl ether of hydroquinone. (See 'Primary cutaneous amyloidosis' above.)There are no effective treatments for DUH. There are isolated reports of successful treatment of facial hyperpigmented macules with laser therapy [159].Genetic syndromes associated with lentiginosis — Genetic syndromes associated with lentiginosis are summarized in the table (table 4). Carney complex — Carney complex, LAMB (lentigines, atrial myxoma, mucocutaneous myxoma, blue nevi) and NAME (nevi, atrial myxoma, myxoid neurofibroma, ephelides) (table 2) are a group of related autosomal dominant conditions also called "myxoma syndrome," characterized by the presence of atrial myxomas, lentigines, skin tumors, and endocrine overactivity. They are caused by mutations in the PRKAR1A gene, encoding the protein kinase regulatory subunit 1A, located at 17q22-24. Lentigines occur most commonly on the face, especially on the lips, eyelids, conjunctiva, and oral mucosa (picture 34), but may be widespread and involve the trunk, extremities, and genitalia [160]. Other skin lesions include junctional and compound nevi, blue nevi, and cutaneous myxomas. The diagnostic criteria of Carney complex are summarized in the table (table 5). Given the rarity of this disorder, patients with suspected Carney complex (and their family members) should be referred to specialized centers with expertise in this area for diagnosis and genetic testing [161].The management of patients with myxoma syndrome involves a multidisciplinary team including a cardiologist, endocrinologist, and dermatologist. Close monitoring with echocardiography is required for these patients, since cardiac myxomas may lead to embolic strokes and heart failure. (See "Cushing's syndrome due to primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease", section on 'Carney complex (CNC)'.) LEOPARD syndrome — LEOPARD syndrome (MIM #151100) is a rare, autosomal dominant disorder caused by mutations in the protein tyrosine phosphatase, PTPN11 gene [162]. LEOPARD is an acronym for the major features of this disorder, including multiple lentigines, ECG conduction abnormalities, ocular hypertelorism, pulmonic stenosis, abnormal genitalia, retardation of growth, and sensorineural deafness. LEOPARD syndrome belongs to a group of developmental disorders called RAS/MAPK pathway syndromes, which include Noonan syndrome, neurofibromatosis type 1, neurofibromatosis type 1-like syndrome (Legius syndrome), cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome, Costello syndrome, and capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation syndrome [163,164]. (See "Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1): Pathogenesis, clinical features, and diagnosis" and "Capillary malformations (port wine stains): Clinical features, diagnosis, and associated syndromes", section on 'Capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation syndrome'.)Multiple lentigines are the most prominent manifestation of LEOPARD syndrome and are present in more than 90 percent of the patients. They appear during infancy and early childhood and increase in number over time to involve a large portion of the skin, including the face (picture 35), neck, and upper trunk (picture 35). Lentigines may also occur on the palms, soles, and sclerae. Café-au-lait macules similar to those found in neurofibromatosis type 1 occur in approximately one-half of the patients.The diagnosis of LEOPARD is difficult, given the highly variable expressivity of the syndrome. In the first year of life, before the appearance of lentigines, the diagnosis can be clinically suspected in infants presenting with three main features: characteristic facial features, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and café-au-lait macules [165]. The diagnosis can be confirmed by molecular screening for PTPN11 mutations.The management of patients with LEOPARD syndrome requires a multidisciplinary approach involving dermatology, cardiology, endocrinology, and other appropriate specialists. Genetic counseling is indicated and involves clinical and cardiologic examination of parents and molecular analysis if appropriate.Peutz-Jeghers syndrome — Peutz-Jeghers syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by mucocutaneous lentigines with intestinal polyposis. It is caused by mutations in the STK11 gene, encoding serine/threonine kinase 11. The lentigines are typically present at birth or appear during childhood. They predominantly affect the perioral and periorbital areas, but may involve the volar and dorsal aspects of the hands and feet (picture 36A-D).Mucosal lesions may affect the palate, tongue, buccal mucosa, and conjunctivae. This syndrome is associated with pancreatic carcinoma and ovarian and testicular tumors. The main entity in the differential diagnosis is Laugier-Hunziker syndrome. The diagnosis and management of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome is discussed in detail separately. (See "Peutz-Jeghers syndrome: Epidemiology, clinical manifestations, and diagnosis" and "Peutz-Jeghers syndrome and juvenile polyposis: Screening and management of patients and families".)Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome — Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS) is a rare, autosomal dominant, gastrointestinal hamartomatous polyposis syndrome caused by germline mutations in the PTEN tumor suppressor gene [119]. Because BRSS is caused by the same germline mutations as Cowden syndrome, also called multiple hamartoma syndrome, the two disorders are considered to be allelic and phenotypic variants of the same disease. In contrast to Cowden syndrome, the clinical manifestations of BRRS arise early in childhood and include hypotonia, delayed psychomotor development, seizures, diarrhea, intussusception, and anemia. Cutaneous manifestations include genital lentigines, facial verrucae, vascular malformations, lipomas, acanthosis nigricans, and multiple acrochordons. Hyperpigmented macules involving the glans penis (picture 37) or vulva are the most specific finding related to the syndrome. The diagnosis and management of BRRS are discussed in more detail elsewhere. (See "PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome, including Cowden syndrome", section on 'Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome'.)Genetic syndromes associated with café-au-lait macules — Genetic syndromes associated with café-au-lait macules are summarized in the table (table 4).Neurofibromatosis type 1 — Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is an autosomal dominant neurocutaneous disorder caused by a mutation in the NF1 gene, encoding the protein neurofibromin, a tumor suppressor expressed in many human cells, primarily in neurons, glial, and Schwann cells [166]. Neurofibromin belongs to a family of GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) that downregulate the cellular proto-oncogenes p21-ras, an important determinant of cell growth and regulation. The presence of six or more café-au-lait-macules (>5 mm in prepubertal individuals and >15 mm in postpubertal individuals), cutaneous neurofibromas (picture 38A-B), and axillary or inguinal freckling (picture 39) are the hallmark of NF1. Other manifestations of NF1 include plexiform neurofibromas, optic pathway gliomas, and other central and peripheral nervous system tumors. The clinical manifestations, diagnosis, and management of NF1 are discussed separately. (See "Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1): Pathogenesis, clinical features, and diagnosis" and "Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1): Management and prognosis".) Neurofibromatosis type 1-like syndrome (Legius syndrome) — Neurofibromatosis type 1-like syndrome or Legius syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by germline loss-of-function mutations in SPRED1, encoding a protein that downregulates the RAS-mitogen activated protein kinase (RAS-MAPK) pathway [167,168]. Clinical features include multiple café-au-lait macules, with or without flexural freckling. Importantly, Legius syndrome lacks neurofibromas and central nervous system tumors. (See "Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1): Pathogenesis, clinical features, and diagnosis", section on 'Legius syndrome'.)McCune-Albright syndrome — McCune-Albright syndrome is a rare mosaic disorder caused by postzygotic activating mutations of the GNAS1 gene, encoding the alpha subunit of the stimulatory G protein [169]. The syndrome is characterized by the triad of polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, café-au-lait macules, and endocrine hyperactivity, classically causing precocious puberty [170]. (See "Definition, etiology, and evaluation of precocious puberty".)The café-au-lait macules appear at birth or shortly after and are the first manifestation of the disease. They have been described as having a "coast of Maine" border and are often unilateral, with midline demarcation and a tendency to follow the Blaschko's lines (picture 40 and picture 41). Later in life, some patients may develop oral mucosal lentigines [171]. There are no effective treatments for hyperpigmented patches associated with McCune-Albright syndrome. The Q-switched ruby laser has been successfully used in a single patient with facial hyperpigmentation [172].GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TREAMENT — Treatment of cutaneous hyperpigmentation is challenging because of its chronic, persistent, and relapsing nature. The approach to treatment involves the removal of provoking factors, photoprotection, cosmetic camouflage, and a variety of pigment reduction modalities, including topical skin lightening agents and laser therapy [173]. However, the various treatment modalities for hyperpigmentation disorders have not been evaluated in high quality studies. In most cases, evidence for efficacy of topical or physical therapies is based upon small series of patients or single-case reports and clinical experience.Disorders associated with deposition of melanin in the epidermis (eg, melasma, postinflammatory hyperpigmentation) usually respond to topical skin lightening agents. In contrast, disorders associated with deposition of melanin in the dermis do not respond to topical therapies and can be successfully treated only with lasers. (See 'Topical therapies' below and "Laser and light therapy for cutaneous hyperpigmentation".)Because sunlight is a major trigger of melanin synthesis, patients with hyperpigmentation should adopt strict photoprotection measures. Cosmetic camouflage may be an option for the management of facial hyperpigmentation.Sun protection — All patients with hyperpigmentation disorders associated with increased melanin production and deposition will benefit from sun avoidance and photoprotection, which involves avoiding the peak hours of sunlight (between 11:00 AM and 4:00 PM); seeking shade; wearing protective clothing (eg, broad-brimmed hats and long-sleeved shirts); and using a broad-spectrum sunscreen with SPF of at least 30. (See "Selection of sunscreen and sun-protective measures".)Cosmetic camouflage — Physical-blocking opaque sunscreens have the dual benefit of camouflaging hyperpigmentation and preventing photo-induced darkening. Many of these physical blockers now come in tinted blends to assist with camouflaging. In addition, many find that the use of make-up helps to even out skin tone. Several available brands that provide heavy coverage include Dermablend, Cover FX, and Covermark/CM Beauty [174]. (See "Melasma", section on 'Camouflage techniques'.)Topical therapies — Disorders associated with deposition of melanin in the epidermis (eg, melasma, postinflammatory hyperpigmentation) can be often successfully treated with topical skin lightening agents. These include hydroquinone, azelaic acid, mequinol, Kojic acid, tretinoin, and several combinations of topical agents. Topical skin lightening agents are discussed in detail elsewhere. (See "Melasma", section on 'Skin lightening agents'.)Laser therapy — Hyperpigmentation disorders associated with melanin deposition in the dermis (eg, nevus of Ota, nevus of Hori) do not respond to topical therapies, but can be often successfully treated with laser therapy [19]. In particular, the 1064 nm Q-switched neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet (QSNY) is the most widely used laser in darker skin types because of longer wavelengths, which allow for deeper penetration.The use of lasers for the treatment of specific hyperpigmentation disorders is discussed separately. (See "Laser and light therapy for cutaneous hyperpigmentation".)SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS●Hyperpigmentation is the darkening or increase in the natural color of the skin usually due to an increased deposition of melanin (hypermelanosis) in the epidermis and/or dermis. It is a feature of a multitude of clinical conditions, ranging from normal variations of skin color to acquired and inherited syndromes, and is one of the most common reasons for dermatologic consultation, particularly in patients with darker skin types. (See 'Introduction' above.)●The diagnosis of most hyperpigmentation disorders is made on clinical grounds. The initial patient evaluation involves a detailed medical history and a complete skin examination. Investigation of family history may be helpful to determine whether the disorder is acquired or inherited, and, in the latter case, the probable inheritance pattern. (See 'Patient evaluation' above.) ●Skin examination should be performed under visible light and Wood's light. Important clinical parameters include the extent of the pigmentary abnormality, color hue and morphology of individual lesions, distribution, and pattern. An algorithmic approach to the diagnosis, based upon history and clinical parameters is shown in the figure. (See 'Skin examination' above.) ●Acquired disorders presenting with circumscribed hyperpigmentation include melasma, postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, erythema dyschromicum perstans, lichen planus pigmentosus, and primary cutaneous amyloidosis. Acquired hyperpigmentation disorders presenting with diffuse hyperpigmentation are most often associated with endocrine and metabolic diseases or are drug-induced. (See 'Acquired hyperpigmentation disorders' above.)●Congenital and inherited hyperpigmentation disorders may be localized (eg, congenital dermal melanocytosis, café-au-lait macule) or diffuse. The latter often show a linear configuration that follows the lines of Blaschko (eg, incontinentia pigmenti, linear and whorled nevoid hypermelanosis) or a reticular pattern (eg, Dowling-Degos disease, reticulate acropigmentation of Kitamura, dyskeratosis congenita). (See 'Congenital and inherited hyperpigmentation disorders' above.)●Multiple lentigines and café-au-lait macules are the hallmark of several genetic syndromes. Carney complex, LEOPARD syndrome, and Peutz-Jeghers syndrome are predominantly associated with lentiginosis. Genetic syndromes associated with café-au-lait macules include neurofibromatosis type 1, Legius syndrome, and McCune-Albright syndrome. (See 'Genetic syndromes associated with lentiginosis' above.) ●Treatment of cutaneous hyperpigmentation is challenging because of its chronic, persistent, and relapsing nature. The approach to management involves the removal of provoking factors, photoprotection, cosmetic camouflage, and a variety of pigment reduction modalities, including topical skin lightening agents and laser therapy. (See 'General principles of treament' above.)
		
