
			INTRODUCTION — This section highlights selected specific new recommendations and/or updates that we anticipate may change usual clinical practice. Practice Changing UpDates focus on changes that may have significant and broad impact on practice, and therefore do not represent all updates that affect practice. These Practice Changing UpDates, reflecting important changes to UpToDate over the past year, are presented chronologically, and are discussed in greater detail in the identified topic reviews.ALLERGY AND IMMUNOLOGY (FEBRUARY 2015)Icatibant for ACE-inhibitor associated angioedema●For patients with ACE-inhibitor associated angioedema that is threatening the airway and does not appear to be stabilizing or improving, we recommend treatment with icatibant (Grade 1B).Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors cause episodic, bradykinin-mediated angioedema in less than 1 percent of recipients, but this accounts for approximately one-third of angioedema cases presenting to emergency departments in countries where these medicines are widely used. The most common approach to management of severe episodes affecting the airway has been discontinuation of the ACE inhibitors and supportive care, which may involve intubation and even tracheotomy. Icatibant, a bradykinin receptor antagonist approved for use in hereditary angioedema, has now been shown to be effective for ACE inhibitor-associated angioedema [1]. In a randomized trial of 27 adults presenting to the emergency department with angioedema of the upper aerodigestive tract while taking an ACE inhibitor, patients received one dose of icatibant or standard therapy (an intravenous glucocorticoid plus an antihistamine). Symptoms in the icatibant group resolved in a median of 8 hours, compared with 27 hours in the glucocorticoid/antihistamine group, and icatibant was well tolerated. Icatibant is most likely to be effective if given in the first few hours of an angioedema attack when the swelling is still increasing. (See "ACE inhibitor-induced angioedema", section on 'Icatibant'.)ONCOLOGY (FEBRUARY 2015)Olaparib as monotherapy for previously treated, platinum-resistant epithelial ovarian cancer●For patients with recurrent epithelial ovarian cancer who are known carriers of a BRCA mutation, and who have progressed on prior treatments for recurrent disease, we recommend olaparib (Grade 1B).Patients with epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) who progress within six months from a platinum-based regimen are characterized as having platinum-resistant disease. These patients have limited treatment options and are often treated with single agent therapies. For a subset of these women who have a BRCA-mutation associated ovarian cancer, olaparib (a poly-ADP ribose polymerase inhibitor) received regulatory approval by the US Food and Drug Administration [2]. This was based on a phase II trial of almost 300 patients with previously treated BRCA mutation-associated ovarian cancer, all of whom were treated with olaparib with encouraging clinical results [3]. Ongoing trials will aim to further clarify the role of olaparib in women with recurrent EOC associated with a BRCA mutation. However, we administer olaparib for women with a BRCA mutation who have progressed on prior therapies. (See "Medical treatment for relapsed epithelial ovarian, fallopian tubal, or peritoneal cancer: Platinum-resistant disease", section on 'Patients with a BRCA mutation'.)GASTROENTEROLOGY AND HEPATOLOGY (DECEMBER 2013, MODIFIED JANUARY 2015)Interferon-free regimens for chronic genotype 1 HCV infection●For patients with chronic genotype 1 HCV infection, we recommend an interferon-free regimen instead of an interferon-containing regimen (Grade 1A).

If cost or insurance coverage is not an issue, we suggest ledipasvir-sofosbuvir rather than other interferon-free regimens (Grade 2B).Several highly effective and well tolerated interferon-free options are now available for chronic genotype 1 hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. Ledipasvir-sofosbuvir, ombitasvir-paritaprevir-ritonavir plus dasabuvir, and simeprevir plus sofosbuvir all achieve sustained virologic response (SVR) rates, and thus effective cure, in excess of 90 percent in genotype 1 infected patients [4-12]. The duration of the regimen and the decision of whether to add weight-based ribavirin depend on the treatment history, presence of cirrhosis, and, for the ombitasvir-paritaprevir-ritonavir plus dasabuvir regimen, the infecting subtype (1a or 1b) (algorithm 1). The choice between the regimens depends primarily on the potential for drug interactions and drug toxicity. Additionally, in the United States, options will be limited by the individual's insurance provider. If cost or insurance coverage is not an issue, we generally favor the regimen of ledipasvir-sofosbuvir for its favorable adverse effect profile, its minimal drug interactions, and its ease of administration (a single pill once daily). (See "Treatment regimens for chronic hepatitis C virus genotype 1", section on 'Selection of treatment regimens'.)ONCOLOGY (SEPTEMBER 2014, MODIFIED JANUARY 2015)Pembrolizumab or nivolumab immunotherapy for previously treated metastatic melanoma●For patients who have progressed on ipilimumab, we recommend treatment with an anti-PD-1 monoclonal antibody (pembrolizumab or nivolumab) (Grade 1A).Monoclonal antibodies (pembrolizumab, nivolimumab) are being used to target the programmed death 1 protein (PD-1), a receptor on T lymphocytes. PD-1 binds to its ligand on tumor cells, preventing the immune system from rejecting the tumor. These antibodies block the interaction of PD-1 with the tumor cell, thereby augmenting the antitumor immune response. In randomized trials, these agents have been shown to be superior to chemotherapy in previously untreated patients and in those refractory to ipilimumab [13-15]. In the United States, both pembrolizumab and nivolumab have been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration. These drugs provide a new option for patients who have progressed on ipilimumab. For patients who have progressed on ipilimumab, we recommend treatment with an anti-PD-1 monoclonal antibody (pembrolizumab or nivolimumab). Immune-related adverse events are common, and regular monitoring for such events (eg, enterocolitis, hepatitis, dermatitis) is indicated. (See "Immunotherapy of advanced melanoma with immune checkpoint inhibition", section on 'Pembrolizumab'.)PEDIATRICS, FAMILY MEDICINE (JANUARY 2015)Bronchodilators not routinely recommended for bronchiolitis in infants and children●We suggest not routinely administering inhaled bronchodilators (albuterol or epinephrine) to infants and children with bronchiolitis (Grade 2B)In November 2014, the American Academy of Pediatrics released updated guidelines for the diagnosis, management, and prevention of bronchiolitis [16]. The 2014 guideline recommends against the administration of inhaled albuterol or epinephrine in the treatment of bronchiolitis; the previous guideline (2006) included a trial of bronchodilators as an option. We agree that bronchodilators should not be used routinely in the treatment of bronchiolitis and no longer suggest a trial of bronchodilators. Although bronchodilators may provide modest short-term clinical improvement, they do not affect overall outcome, may have adverse effects, and increase the cost of care.



While we no longer routinely suggest inhaled bronchodilators for infants and children with bronchiolitis, a one-time trial of inhaled bronchodilators may be warranted for infants and children with bronchiolitis and severe disease (eg, nasal flaring; retractions; grunting; respiratory rate >70 breaths per minute; dyspnea; or cyanosis) or respiratory failure. (See "Bronchiolitis in infants and children: Treatment; outcome; and prevention", section on 'Inhaled bronchodilators'.)CARDIOVASCULAR MEDICINE (DECEMBER 2014)Optimal duration of dual antiplatelet therapy after coronary stenting●For patients treated with drug-eluting or bare metal stents who are not at high bleeding risk and who do not have planned non-cardiac surgery within one year, we recommend dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) for 12 months (Grade 1B). After 12 months, if there is no evidence of major bleeding or other important difficulty with DAPT, we suggest continuing this therapy for an additional 18 months (Grade 2B).All patients who undergo percutaneous coronary intervention with stenting receive dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT), which is the combination of aspirin and a P2Y12 receptor blocker. However, the optimal duration of DAPT is not known; 12 months has been the commonly recommended duration. The DAPT trial randomly assigned 9961 such patients, who had been successfully treated with 12 months of aspirin and a P2Y12 receptor blocker (either clopidogrel or prasugrel), to continue receiving the P2Y12 receptor blocker or placebo for another 18 months; all patients continued aspirin [17]. The rates for each of the co-primary end points of stent thrombosis and major adverse cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events (a composite of death from any cause, MI, or stroke) were lower with continued P2Y12 therapy (0.4 versus 1.4 percent and 4.3 versus 5.9 percent). However, the rate of moderate or severe bleeding was increased (2.5 versus 1.6 percent). Based on available evidence, including the DAPT trial, we recommend DAPT for 12 months in patients not at high risk of bleeding, which is the major complication of this therapy. After 12 months of uncomplicated DAPT therapy, we suggest an additional 18 months of treatment. (See "Antiplatelet therapy after coronary artery stenting", section on 'Drug-eluting stents'.)PEDIATRICS, FAMILY MEDICINE (DECEMBER 2014)Indications for voiding cystourethrogram after first UTI●In addition to anomalies on renal ultrasound, poor growth, or hypertension, we now also consider the combination of fever ≥39°C (102.2°F) and a pathogen other than Escherichia coli to be an indication for voiding cystourethrogram (VCUG) after a first febrile urinary tract infection in a child.Young children with urinary tract infection (UTI) often undergo imaging studies to evaluate for abnormalities such as vesicoureteral reflux (VUR). There is a lack of consensus about the optimal imaging strategy, particularly whether voiding cystourethrogram (VCUG) should be performed after the first UTI. Predictors of renal scarring after a first UTI were investigated in a meta-analysis of individual patient data from nine studies including >1200 children <18 years who underwent renal scintigraphy at least five months after their first UTI [18]. The risk of renal scarring was greatest in patients with Grade IV or V VUR (odds ratio 22.5); approximately two-thirds of children with Grade IV or V VUR had either abnormal renal ultrasonography or the combination of temperature ≥39°C (102.2°F) and a pathogen other than Escherichia coli. Based on these findings, we have added the combination of temperature ≥39°C and a pathogen other than E. coli to our indications for obtaining a VCUG after a first febrile UTI. (See "Urinary tract infections in infants and children older than one month: Acute management, imaging, and prognosis", section on 'Indications'.)ONCOLOGY (JULY 2014, MODIFIED DECEMBER 2014)Ovarian suppression plus exemestane for premenopausal early hormone receptor-positive breast cancer●For premenopausal women with non-metastatic, hormone-receptor positive cancer, our initial treatment approach is as follows: For women with high-risk breast cancer, we recommend ovarian suppression plus exemestane rather than tamoxifen (Grade 1B). For women deemed not to have a high-risk breast cancer, we suggest tamoxifen as single-agent therapy (Grade 2B).Historically, premenopausal women with newly diagnosed hormone receptor (HR)-positive breast cancer have been treated with tamoxifen as a single agent for adjuvant therapy. However, emerging data suggest that combining endocrine therapy with ovarian suppression may be more effective for some women. Primary results from the Suppression of Ovarian Function Trial (SOFT) show no statistical difference in survival outcomes among patients treated with tamoxifen with or without ovarian suppression [19]. However, a study that combined the results from the SOFT trial and the Tamoxifen and Exemestane Trial (TEXT) found that ovarian suppression plus the aromatase inhibitor, exemestane, significantly improved disease-free survival at five years compared with ovarian suppression plus tamoxifen, particularly among patients treated with chemotherapy [20]. However, at five years, there was no difference in overall survival. Based on these results, for patients with a higher risk of recurrence (chemotherapy treatment and/or <35 years old), we recommend ovarian suppression plus exemestane. Patients deemed not to be at a high risk of recurrence can reasonably be treated with single agent tamoxifen. Aromatase inhibitors should not be used as single agent therapy in premenopausal women with intact ovarian function. (See "Adjuvant endocrine therapy for non-metastatic, hormone receptor-positive breast cancer", section on 'SOFT trial' and "Adjuvant endocrine therapy for non-metastatic, hormone receptor-positive breast cancer", section on 'SOFT and TEXT combined analysis'.)GASTROENTEROLOGY AND HEPATOLOGY, HOSPITAL MEDICINE, ADULT PRIMARY CARE, FAMILY MEDICINE (OCTOBER 2014)Intermittent dosing of proton pump inhibitors for peptic ulcer bleeding●For patients with peptic ulcer bleeding, we recommend treatment with intravenous (IV) pantoprazole, esomeprazole, or omeprazole (where available) at a dose of 40 mg twice daily rather than a high-dose continuous infusion (Grade 1A).Treatment with proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) leads to elevation of gastric pH levels, which stabilizes blood clots and improves clinical outcomes. As a result, PPIs are recommended for all patients with peptic ulcer bleeding. High-dose continuous infusions of intravenous (IV) PPIs have traditionally been recommended for patients presenting with upper gastrointestinal bleeding. However, several meta-analyses of randomized trials have failed to show superior outcomes with high-dose continuous IV proton pump administration compared with intermittent dosing (eg, 40 mg IV twice daily). In addition, intermittent dosing could lead to decreased resource utilization and cost. In the most recent meta-analysis, intermittent dosing was not inferior to high-dose continuous infusions with regard to rebleeding, mortality, need for surgery or repeat intervention, or the need for urgent intervention in patients with peptic ulcers with high-risk stigmata (active bleeding, adherent clot, or a visible vessel) [21]. There was also a trend toward a decreased risk of rebleeding with intermittent dosing. Based on this cumulative evidence, for patients presenting with upper gastrointestinal bleeding, we now recommend treatment with IV pantoprazole, esomeprazol, or omeprazole (where available) at a dose of 40 mg twice daily rather than a high-dose continuous infusion. (See "Overview of the treatment of bleeding peptic ulcers", section on 'Summary and recommendations' and "Overview of the treatment of bleeding peptic ulcers", section on 'Continuous versus intermittent dosing'.)CARDIOVASCULAR MEDICINE (OCTOBER 2014)Culprit-only or multivessel PCI in patients with STEMI●For most patients undergoing primary PCI, we suggest performing non-culprit vessel PCI of significant lesions rather than culprit vessel only PCI (Grade 2B).The optimal revascularization strategy with percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) is not known for the 40 to 50 percent of patients with acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) found to have significant lesions (≥50 percent luminal narrowing) in addition to the lesion responsible for the acute MI. A 2014 meta-analysis of three randomized trials found that the risks of subsequent revascularization and nonfatal MI were lower with multivessel compared to culprit only PCI [22]. For many patients with non-culprit lesions, we now proceed with multivessel revascularization at the time of primary PCI. We do not perform immediate non-culprit PCI when patients meet the following criteria: chronic kidney disease; administration of a large contrast volume; less than TIMI III flow in the culprit vessel after optimal PCI; complex non-culprit stenosis; patient, operator, or health care team fatigue; anticipated need for coronary artery bypass graft surgery or valve surgery in the near future; severe comorbidities. (See "Primary percutaneous coronary intervention in acute ST elevation myocardial infarction: Periprocedural management", section on 'Non-culprit PCI'.)NEPHROLOGY AND HYPERTENSION, ADULT PRIMARY CARE, FAMILY MEDICINE, EMERGENCY MEDICINE (SEPTEMBER 2014)Initial imaging in patients with suspected nephrolithiasis●In most patients with suspected nephrolithiasis, non-contrast helical computerized tomography (CT) and ultrasonography are the tests of choice. In patients for whom there is a high clinical suspicion for nephrolithiasis and a low clinical suspicion for an alternative serious diagnosis, ultrasonography leads to less radiation exposure than CT and equivalent overall outcomes.Computerized tomography (CT) and ultrasonography as initial imaging strategies were compared in a large multicenter randomized trial [23]. Patients presenting to an emergency department (ED) with suspected nephrolithiasis (but without signs of another serious diagnosis) were assigned to initial imaging with a non-contrast helical CT scan, ultrasonography performed by a radiologist, or ultrasonography performed at the bedside by an ED physician. Subsequent evaluation and care was at the discretion of the treating clinicians. The sensitivity for stone detection was lower for ultrasonography than CT scan (54 percent if performed by an ED physician or 57 percent performed by a radiologist compared with 88 percent for CT). A CT scan was performed in 41 percent of patients who initially underwent ultrasonography while 5 percent of patients who initially had a CT subsequently had ultrasonography. Despite the lower sensitivity of ultrasonography, the rates of important missed diagnoses that resulted in complications, such as pyelonephritis with sepsis or diverticular abscess, were similar (0.5 percent with ultrasonography versus 0.3 percent with CT). Serious adverse events and return visits to the ED after discharge were also similar. Patients assigned to receive an initial CT were exposed to more than twice as much radiation during the initial ED visit than those assigned ultrasonography although, because many patients assigned ultrasonography ultimately underwent CT, the differences in cumulative radiation exposure at six months were less dramatic. While we previously suggested a non-contrast helical CT scan as the test of choice for most patients with suspected nephrolithiasis, we now consider that both CT and ultrasonography are acceptable initial imaging modalities in patients with suspected nephrolithiasis who have a low clinical suspicion for an alternative serious diagnosis. In such patients, ultrasonography leads to less radiation exposure than CT and equivalent overall outcomes. (See "Diagnosis and acute management of suspected nephrolithiasis in adults", section on 'Tests of choice: Non-contrast CT scan or ultrasonography'.)INFECTIOUS DISEASES, ADULT PRIMARY CARE, FAMILY MEDICINE, GERIATRICS (SEPTEMBER 2014)Pneumococcal conjugate vaccine in adults ≥65 years of age●For all adults ≥65 years of age, we recommend pneumococcal vaccination (Grade 1B). Vaccination for such individuals should now consist of two vaccines (PCV13 and PPSV23) administered sequentially, with the sequence and timing dependent on whether the patient had previously received PPSV23.The 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23) has been recommended for many years in the United States for all adults ≥65 years of age. In September 2014, the United States Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) began also recommending the pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13) for all adults ≥65 years of age [24]. Current recommendations for individuals ≥65 years of age who have not previously received either PCV13 or PPSV23 are to administer PCV13 followed 6 to 12 months later by PPSV23 (algorithm 2). In patients who have already received PPSV23, at least one year should elapse before they are given PCV13.The ACIP revision was prompted by results from the CAPiTA trial. This randomized placebo-controlled trial, including approximately 85,000 adults ≥65 years of age in the Netherlands, demonstrated the efficacy of PCV13 against vaccine-type pneumococcal pneumonia, vaccine-type nonbacteremic pneumococcal pneumonia, and vaccine-type invasive pneumococcal disease [25]. However, some concern has been raised that since this trial began before PCV13 was used routinely in infants in the Netherlands, it might not answer the question of whether its use in adults is efficacious in countries that routinely vaccinate infants. (See "Pneumococcal vaccination in adults", section on 'Indications'.)INFECTIOUS DISEASES (SEPTEMBER 2014)Corticosteroids of limited benefit in tuberculous pericarditis●For HIV-infected patients with tuberculous pericarditis that is not constrictive, and who are not felt to be at high risk of developing constrictive pericarditis, we recommend not administering corticosteroids (Grade 1B). For HIV-uninfected patients with tuberculous pericarditis that is not constrictive, and who are not felt to be at high risk of developing constrictive pericarditis, we suggest not administering corticosteroids (Grade 2C).Whether corticosteroids are beneficial for patients with tuberculous pericarditis has been controversial. A randomized trial including 1400 adults initiating antimicrobial treatment for definite or probable tuberculous pericarditis in South Africa (approximately two-thirds of patients had concomitant HIV infection) demonstrated no effect of adjunctive corticosteroids on the primary composite efficacy outcome of death, cardiac tamponade requiring pericardiocentesis, or development of constrictive pericarditis [26]. Corticosteroid use did reduce the incidence of constrictive pericarditis alone (4.4 versus 7.8 percent). The overall lack of benefit may have reflected harm from corticosteroid treatment in patients with HIV, and it remains possible that patients without HIV could benefit from corticosteroids. Based on the totality of the evidence, we do not routinely use adjunctive corticosteroids in the absence of constrictive disease or high risk for constrictive disease. This approach is in disagreement with prior guidelines favoring routine use of corticosteroids for all patients with tuberculous pericarditis.



We continue to suggest administration of corticosteroids for patients with constrictive tuberculous pericarditis and for those felt to be at high risk of developing the condition (ie, large effusion, high level of pericardial fluid inflammatory cells, or early signs of constriction). (See "Tuberculous pericarditis", section on 'Role of corticosteroids'.)CARDIOVASCULAR MEDICINE (SEPTEMBER 2014)Routine thrombus aspiration in STEMI not helpful●We suggest not routinely performing thrombus aspiration in patients undergoing primary PCI (Grade 2B).Intracoronary thrombus is found in the majority of patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI), and higher burdens of thrombus are associated with worse outcomes. Thrombus aspiration prior to percutaneous intervention (PCI) can reduce the thrombus burden; however, there has been conflicting evidence on whether this improves outcomes. A prior meta-analysis of randomized trials indicated a reduced risk of all-cause mortality with aspiration thrombectomy, although there were some concerns about the analysis and generalizability of the underlying trials. The TASTE trial, not included in the meta-analysis, randomly assigned 7244 patients to routine thrombus aspiration followed by PCI or to PCI only. Previously reported 30-day results found no difference in the primary end point of death from any cause. In a newly published report of outcomes at one year from the TASTE trial, there was similarly no difference in mortality for patients treated with and without thrombectomy (5.3 versus 5.6 percent) [27]. Based on these results, we no longer suggest the routine use of thrombus aspiration prior to PCI in STEMI patients. It is reasonable to continue to use aspiration thrombectomy in patients with a large thrombus burden. (See "Suboptimal reperfusion after primary percutaneous coronary intervention in acute ST elevation myocardial infarction", section on 'Thrombectomy'.)CARDIOVASCULAR MEDICINE (AUGUST 2014)Heparin preferred to bivalirudin for primary PCI●For patients with acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction who are treated with primary percutaneous coronary intervention, we suggest unfractionated heparin in preference to bivalirudin (Grade 2B). This recommendation assumes that patients will receive a potent oral antiplatelet agent (ticagrelor or prasugrel), which we prefer to clopidogrel.The recommended anticoagulant strategy in patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) who are treated with primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) continues to evolve. In recent years bivalirudin has been the preferred agent. In the HEAT-PPCI single center trial, unfractionated heparin (UFH) was directly compared to bivalirudin in 1829 such patients [28]. The use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors was about 15 percent in both groups and all patients received a potent oral P2Y12 platelet receptor blocker (ticagrelor or prasugrel). The primary efficacy outcome, a composite of all-cause mortality, cerebrovascular accident, reinfarction, or additional unplanned target lesion revascularization, occurred significantly more often in the bivalirudin group (8.7 versus 5.7 percent), while the rate of bleeding did not differ significantly. For STEMI patients undergoing primary PCI who receive a potent P2Y12 receptor blocker, we now prefer UFH rather bivaliruidin. Furthermore, glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors do not appear to be routinely indicated with UFH. (See "Anticoagulant therapy in acute ST elevation myocardial infarction", section on 'UFH compared to bivalirudin'.)HEMATOLOGY (JULY 2014, MODIFIED AUGUST 2014)Targeted therapy for relapsed chronic lymphocytic leukemia●For most patients with refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), we recommend ibrutinib or the combination of idelalisib plus rituximab (Grade 1A).In 2014, the US Food and Drug Administration approved two new oral therapies targeted to the B cell signaling pathway (ibrutinib and idelalisib) for the treatment of relapsed or refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). Ibrutinib is used as a single agent while idelalisib is given in combination with rituximab. Approval was based on two randomized studies in heavily pretreated patients that demonstrated high response rates and improved overall survival when compared with immunotherapy (ofatumumab or rituximab) alone [29,30]. The evidence regarding ibrutinib is somewhat more robust; however, we have no evidence to suggest one of these options is superior to the other. A choice between these two regimens is largely based on availability and physician familiarity. (See "Treatment of relapsed or refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia", section on 'Ibrutinib'.)INFECTIOUS DISEASES, ADULT PRIMARY CARE, FAMILY MEDICINE, PEDIATRICS (JULY 2014)Testing algorithms to diagnose HIV infection●For laboratory-based HIV testing in patients two years and older, we suggest a combination assay that detects HIV antigen and antibodies as the initial test followed by an HIV-1/HIV-2 differentiation assay to confirm a positive result.We agree with new recommendations from the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to use a combination assay that detects HIV antigen and antibodies as the initial test for laboratory-based HIV screening and diagnosis for patients two years and older (algorithm 3) [31]. If the initial test is reactive, an HIV-1/HIV-2 differentiation assay should be performed as a confirmatory test. Testing with an antibody-only assay followed by a confirmatory Western blot is no longer recommended. In comparison, the new algorithm is better able to diagnose acute infection when antibody may not yet be detectable (eg, "window period of acute HIV infection") and can provide information as to whether the patient is infected with HIV-1, HIV-2, or both. Reactive rapid antibody tests performed in community-based settings should be confirmed using this new algorithm as well. (See "Screening and diagnostic testing for HIV infection", section on 'Testing algorithm'.)INFECTIOUS DISEASES (JULY 2014)Timing of antiretroviral initiation in HIV-infected patients with cryptococcal meningitis●For patients with HIV infection and cryptococcal meningitis who are not receiving antiretroviral therapy (ART), we suggest delaying initiation of ART until at least four weeks after antifungal induction therapy has been started (Grade 2B). For patients with access to close medical follow-up and preventative therapy, we typically start ART 10 weeks after the initiation of antifungal therapy to minimize the risks of immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) and drug interactions.HIV-infected individuals with cryptococcal meningitis can develop paradoxical worsening of cryptococcal disease following initiation of antiretroviral therapy (ART) because immune reconstitution can result in a local inflammatory reaction at sites of a pre-existing infection. Thus, the timing of ART initiation must weigh this risk against the potential advantage of early immune recovery in severely immunosuppressed patients. In a randomized trial of 177 HIV-infected patients with cryptococcal meningitis in Uganda and South Africa, mortality was higher when ART was initiated within one or two weeks after starting antifungal therapy compared with five weeks after starting antifungal therapy [32]. Most excess deaths associated with early ART initiation occurred two to five weeks after initiation of antifungal therapy. Based on results from this and other trials, we suggest that initiation of ART be delayed for at least four weeks after antifungal therapy has been started. For patients with access to close medical follow-up and preventative therapy, we typically start ART 10 weeks after the initiation of antifungal therapy to minimize the risks of immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) and drug interactions. (See "Clinical management and monitoring during antifungal therapy of the HIV-infected patient with cryptococcal meningoencephalitis", section on 'Timing of antiretroviral therapy'.)ONCOLOGY, NEUROLOGY (JULY 2014)Radiation plus chemotherapy for low-grade glioma●For patients with high-risk, low-grade glioma, we recommend postoperative radiation therapy plus chemotherapy rather than either modality alone (Grade 1B).Radiation therapy (RT) is a standard component of postoperative therapy for patients with high-risk, low-grade glioma, but the value of adjunctive chemotherapy has been debated. Previously published results of a randomized trial in which patients with high-risk, low-grade glioma received RT plus procarbazine, lomustine, and vincristine (PCV) or RT alone showed that PCV improved progression-free survival but not overall survival with a median follow-up of 5.9 years [33]. With longer follow-up, however, a survival benefit has emerged. In an update presented at the 2014 American Society of Clinical Oncology meeting with nearly 12 years of follow-up, patients treated with RT plus PCV had improved overall survival compared with RT alone (13.3 versus 7.8 years) [34]. Based on these results, we now recommend RT plus chemotherapy rather than either therapy alone in patients with high-risk, low-grade glioma. (See "Management of low-grade glioma", section on 'Adjunctive chemotherapy'.)ONCOLOGY (JUNE 2014)Chemohormonal therapy for metastatic prostate cancer●For men with no prior hormonal therapy for metastatic prostate cancer (castration-sensitive disease) who have visceral metastases and/or four or more bone metastases, we recommend chemohormonal therapy combining docetaxel with androgen deprivation therapy rather than androgen deprivation therapy alone (Grade 1B).Historically, androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) has been the initial therapy for men with metastatic prostate cancer, and docetaxel chemotherapy has been reserved for patients with castration-resistant disease. In the CHAARTED trial, men with no prior hormonal therapy for metastatic prostate cancer (castration-sensitive disease) were randomly assigned to ADT plus docetaxel or to ADT alone [35]. Initial chemohormonal therapy with the combination produced a statistically significant and clinically meaningful improvement in overall survival compared with ADT alone. Based on these results, we recommend chemohormonal therapy for men with castration-sensitive, high-volume metastatic prostate cancer. (See "Initial therapy for castration sensitive metastatic prostate cancer", section on 'Chemohormonal therapy'.)NEUROLOGY, CARDIOLOGY, ADULT PRIMARY CARE, FAMILY MEDICINE (JUNE 2014)Evaluation for occult atrial fibrillation in patients with cryptogenic stroke or TIA●For patients with a cryptogenic ischemic stroke or TIA and no evidence of atrial fibrillation on ECG and 24-hour cardiac monitoring, we suggest ambulatory cardiac monitoring for several weeks.Two recent trials confirm that paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (AF), an important potential mechanism for ischemic stroke, may be missed using standard cardiac monitoring such as continuous telemetry and 24- or 48-hour Holter monitors:●In the CRYSTAL AF trial, 441 patients with cryptogenic stroke and no evidence of AF during at least 24 hours of ECG monitoring were randomly assigned to prolonged ambulatory cardiac monitoring with a subcutaneous implantable loop recorder or to a control group with conventional follow-up [36]. At six months, AF detection was significantly higher in the implantable recorder group (8.9 versus 1.4 percent in the control group).●In the EMBRACE trial, 572 patients who had a cryptogenic stroke or TIA (and no evidence of AF on routine monitoring) were randomly assigned to additional ambulatory monitoring with a 30-day external loop recorder or a 24-hour Holter monitor [37]. The rate of AF detection was significantly greater in the group monitored for 30 days (16.1 versus 3.2 percent).Given these findings, we now suggest ambulatory cardiac monitoring for several weeks for patients with a cryptogenic ischemic stroke or TIA. Such patients are characterized by brain ischemia not attributable to a definite source of cardioembolism, large artery atherosclerosis, or small artery disease despite an extensive vascular and cardiac evaluation, including no evidence of AF on standard 12-lead ECG and 24-hour cardiac monitoring. (See "Overview of the evaluation of stroke", section on 'Monitoring for occult atrial fibrillation'.)





CARDIOVASCULAR MEDICINE, GENERAL SURGERY, ADULT PRIMARY CARE, FAMILY MEDICINE, HEMATOLOGY (MAY 2014)Aspirin and noncardiovascular surgery●For patients taking aspirin for primary or secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease, we recommend discontinuing aspirin about seven days before noncardiovascular surgery (Grade 1B).Many patients who are scheduled to undergo surgery are taking aspirin for the primary or secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease. The best evidence regarding the impact of aspirin on outcomes comes from the POISE-2 trial in which 10,010 patients scheduled for noncardiac surgery, with or at risk of atherosclerotic disease, were randomly assigned to either aspirin or placebo [38]. The primary outcome of death or nonfatal myocardial infarction (MI) at 30 days was similar in both groups as well as between those who were taking long-term aspirin and those who were not. As expected, major bleeding was more common in the aspirin group. Based on POISE-2, we recommend discontinuing aspirin about seven days before noncardiovascular surgery. While some patients in POISE-2 underwent vascular surgery, we are awaiting further data before revising recommendations about aspirin use in such patients. (See "Management of cardiac risk for noncardiac surgery", section on 'Antiplatelet therapy'.)INFECTIOUS DISEASES, ADULT PRIMARY CARE, FAMILY MEDICINE (MAY 2014)CD4 cell count monitoring for well-controlled HIV-infected patients●For HIV-infected patients who have achieved consistent viral suppression on at least two years of antiretroviral therapy, we suggest that CD4 cell count monitoring be performed every 12 months when counts are 300 to 500 cells/microL and be optional when counts are >500 cells/microL. More frequent testing is warranted for changes in clinical status.For HIV-infected individuals, CD4 cell count monitoring informs prognosis and the need for continued prophylaxis to prevent opportunistic infections. Among patients on stable antiretroviral therapy (ART) whose CD4 cell count has stabilized at a level well above the threshold for developing an opportunistic infection, CD4 cell count monitoring has traditionally been performed every 6 to 12 months. In 2014, the Department of Health and Human Services of the United States and the International Antiviral Society-USA panel issued new recommendations for less frequent monitoring in patients who have achieved consistent viral suppression and CD4 cell counts well above the threshold for opportunistic infections (eg, >300 cells/microL) on at least two years of ART [39,40]. In such patients, we monitor the CD4 cell count every 12 months if the CD4 cell count is between 300 and 500 cells/microL. If the CD4 cell count is >500 cells/microL, CD4 cell count monitoring is optional. More frequent testing is warranted for changes in clinical status (ie, receipt of immunosuppressive therapy or virologic failure). (See "Patient monitoring during HIV antiretroviral therapy", section on 'CD4 cell count monitoring'.)
		
