
			INTRODUCTION — Most head and neck cancers begin in the mucosal surfaces of the upper aerodigestive tract and these are predominantly squamous cell carcinomas. An overview of treatment for head and neck squamous cell carcinomas will be presented here. An overview of the diagnostic approach and staging of head and neck cancers is presented separately. (See "Overview of the diagnosis and staging of head and neck cancer".)Malignancies arising in other organs within the head and neck regions are discussed in the relevant site-specific topics.INTEGRATED APPROACH TO MANAGEMENT — A multidisciplinary approach is required before therapeutic intervention for planning treatment and managing these patients. This should include surgeons, medical oncologists, and radiation oncologists, as well as dentists, speech/swallowing pathologists, dieticians, and rehabilitation therapists.Furthermore, treatment of complex cases of head and neck cancer should be treated at high-volume centers whenever possible, where expertise in each of these disciplines may be better [1]. An analysis of outcomes from a large randomized trial (RTOG 0129) found that patients treated at centers with historically high accrual to head and neck clinical trials had a significantly better five-year overall survival rate compared with those treated at centers with historically low accrual (69 versus 51 percent) [2]. These differences could not be explained based upon differences in the prognostic factors of enrolled patients.ANATOMIC SUBSITES — Head and neck cancers arise from a variety of sites within the head and neck region, which is divided into five basic areas (figure 1). These are discussed in detail separately. (See "Overview of the diagnosis and staging of head and neck cancer", section on 'Anatomic subsites'.)In brief:●The oral cavity includes the lips, buccal mucosa, anterior tongue, floor of the mouth, hard palate, upper gingiva, lower gingiva, and retromolar trigone (figure 2).●The pharynx is divided into the oropharynx, the nasopharynx, and the hypopharynx. •The nasopharynx, the narrow tubular passage behind the nasal cavity, is the upper part of the pharynx.•The oropharynx, the middle part of the pharynx, includes the tonsillar area, the tongue base, the soft palate, and the posterior pharyngeal wall. •The hypopharynx, which is the lower part of the pharynx, includes the pyriform sinuses, the posterior surface of the larynx (postcricoid area) and the inferoposterior, and inferolateral pharyngeal walls.●The larynx contains the vocal cords and epiglottis. It is divided into three anatomic regions: the supraglottic larynx, the glottic larynx (true vocal cords and the anterior and posterior commissures), and the subglottic larynx (figure 3 and figure 4).●The nasal cavity and the paranasal sinuses, which include the maxillary, ethmoid, sphenoid, and frontal sinuses (figure 5).●The major salivary glands (parotid, submandibular, and sublingual (figure 6)) and the minor salivary glands, which are located throughout the submucosa of the mouth and upper aerodigestive tract, including the oral cavity (especially the palate), paranasal sinuses, larynx, and pharynx.TNM STAGING SYSTEM — The tumor node metastases (TNM) system of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) and the International Union for Cancer Control (UICC) is used to stage cancers of the head and neck [3]. The T classifications indicate the extent of the primary tumor and are site specific; there is considerable overlap in the cervical node (N) classifications. TNM staging varies depending upon the primary tumor site:●Oral cavity (table 1) (see "Treatment of early (stage I and II) head and neck cancer: The oral cavity", section on 'Anatomy and staging')●Nasopharynx (table 2) (see "Treatment of early and locoregionally advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma", section on 'Staging and pathology')●Oropharynx (table 3) (see "Treatment of early (stage I and II) head and neck cancer: The oropharynx", section on 'Staging')●Hypopharynx (table 4) (see "Treatment of early (stage I and II) head and neck cancer: The hypopharynx", section on 'Anatomy and staging')●Larynx (table 5) (see "Treatment of early (stage I and II) head and neck cancer: The larynx", section on 'Staging and anatomy')●Nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses (table 6) (see "Tumors of the nasal cavity" and "Cancer of the nasal vestibule", section on 'Staging' and "Paranasal sinus cancer", section on 'Diagnosis and staging')●Salivary glands (table 7) (see "Salivary gland tumors: Epidemiology, diagnosis, evaluation, and staging", section on 'Staging')The approach to the diagnosis and staging of head and neck cancer is discussed separately. (See "Overview of the diagnosis and staging of head and neck cancer", section on 'Diagnosis and staging evaluation'.)MANAGEMENT OF SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMASLocalized (early stage) disease — Approximately 30 to 40 percent of patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinomas present with stage I or II (early stage) disease. In general, these patients are treated with either primary surgery or definitive radiation therapy (RT). Patients with carcinoma in situ usually are managed surgically in the same way as those with T1 disease. Five-year overall survival in patients with stage I or stage II disease is typically from 70 to 90 percent. Careful observation and follow-up after initial treatment are required both to detect a potentially curable recurrence and to identify and treat second primary tumors. Particularly in patients with tobacco and alcohol-related head and neck cancers, there is a substantial increase in the risk of a second head and neck cancer as well as of a second primary arising in the lung. Smoking cessation should be pursued in smokers. (See "Second primary malignancies in patients with head and neck cancers" and "Overview of smoking cessation management in adults".)RT and surgery result in similar rates of local control and survival for many sites; the choice of therapy is typically based upon the specific site and its requirements, surgical accessibility of the tumor, and the functional outcomes and morbidity associated with each modality. Oral cavity cancers are a notable exception and are usually best treated with surgery based upon generally better cure rates and toxicity profile compared with radiation based therapy. External beam RT or brachytherapy may be options, especially if surgical expertise is not available.Traditional surgical approaches through skin incisions to gain access to the mucosal primary (ie, wide local excision) are usually used for oral cavity, salivary, and thyroid cancers, which are easily accessible. At other sites, minimally invasive techniques, such as transoral laser microsurgery (TOLM) for larynx and hypopharynx cancers and transoral robotic surgery (TORS) for oropharynx cancers, have improved transoral access. These approaches can improve functional outcomes and decrease morbidity, compared with standard surgical approaches.Definitive RT approaches include external beam RT and brachytherapy. Curative RT treatment requires three-dimensional conformal technique at a minimum. Highly conformal radiation techniques, such as intensity-modulated RT (IMRT) and image-guided RT (IGRT), have demonstrated reduced morbidity and represent current best practice where available. (See "General principles of radiation therapy for head and neck cancer", section on 'Three-dimensional conformal RT'.)For patients initially treated with surgery, postoperative RT with or without concurrent chemotherapy is indicated for advanced stage cancers, close or positive margins, and other factors that increase the risk of local recurrence, including perineural invasion and lymphovascular invasion. The finding of multiple lymph nodes on elective lymph node dissection in the clinically N0 patient is likewise an indication for radiation. (See "Postoperative radiation therapy in the management of head and neck cancer".)Specific recommendations for pretreatment evaluation and treatment are described according to the head and neck squamous cell carcinoma site.●(See "Treatment of early (stage I and II) head and neck cancer: The oral cavity".)●(See "Treatment of early (stage I and II) head and neck cancer: The oropharynx", section on 'General principles'.)●(See "Treatment of early (stage I and II) head and neck cancer: The hypopharynx".)●(See "Treatment of early (stage I and II) head and neck cancer: The larynx".)Locoregionally advanced disease — Locoregionally advanced (stage III/IV) squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck is associated with a high risk of both local recurrence and distant metastases. Combined modality approaches (surgery, radiation therapy, and/or chemotherapy) are generally required to optimize the chances for long-term disease control [4,5].These combined modality approaches include primary surgery followed by either postoperative RT or concurrent chemoradiotherapy, induction chemotherapy (the addition of chemotherapy prior to surgery and/or RT), concurrent chemoradiotherapy without surgery, and sequential therapy (induction chemotherapy followed by concurrent chemoradiotherapy) without surgery.Decisions about the optimal sequencing and selection of surgery, RT, and/or chemotherapy require multidisciplinary input. Key factors to consider include the primary tumor site and disease extent, individual patient factors (age, comorbidity, preferences regarding treatment type), and the likely functional consequences and morbidity of each treatment approach. The choice of therapy should also take into account the experience and technology available at the patient’s medical institution.●Oral cavity – Surgery is generally preferred for locoregionally advanced oral cavity squamous cell carcinomas since most cases are easily accessible, and simultaneous resection and reconstruction can be accomplished with acceptable functional outcomes. However, oral cavity tumors are aggressive cancers with high rates of locoregional recurrence; thus, postoperative RT with or without chemotherapy should be strongly considered.Definitive RT, concurrent chemoradiotherapy, and sequential therapy are typically reserved for patients who are medically inoperable, who have unresectable disease, or who have resectable disease where surgical resection cannot be accomplished with acceptable long-term functional consequences (eg, total glossectomy that may require TL to prevent aspiration).●Oropharynx, hypopharynx, and larynx – Organ-function-sparing approaches (TORS, TOLM, chemoradiotherapy) rather than large ablative primary surgery affecting function are preferred for most patients with cancers of the oropharynx, hypopharynx, and larynx, even if the cancer is potentially resectable. Concurrent chemoradiotherapy is a standard option for functional organ preservation.●Definitive RT alone, often using an altered fractionation schedule, remains a treatment option for elderly patients and those with a poor performance status, as the meta-analysis showed a lack of benefit for concurrent chemotherapy in those in their 70’s and a potential detriment for those in their 80’s.The efficacy, indications, and application of organ-sparing approaches are discussed separately, as is definitive RT and postoperative RT:●(See "Locally advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck: Approaches combining chemotherapy and radiation therapy".)●(See "Definitive radiation therapy alone for advanced (stage III and IV) head and neck cancer: Dose and fractionation schedule".)●(See "Postoperative radiation therapy in the management of head and neck cancer".)Specific recommendations for treatment are discussed according to the primary site of disease:●(See "Treatment of locoregionally advanced (stage III and IV) head and neck cancer: The oral cavity".)●(See "Treatment of locoregionally advanced (stage III and IV) head and neck cancer: The oropharynx".)●(See "Treatment of locoregionally advanced (stage III and IV) head and neck cancer: The larynx and hypopharynx".)Management of the neck — Head and neck squamous cell carcinomas frequently metastasize to the cervical lymph nodes, an occurrence that has a markedly negative impact on prognosis. Consequently, treatment of the cervical neck nodes, even if involvement is clinically occult, is often part of the treatment strategy.For patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinomas who have cervical lymph node involvement at presentation and are treated with definitive RT or chemoradiotherapy, management of residual abnormalities in the neck can be a particularly difficult issue. For patients with complete regression as documented clinically and by structural (computed tomography [CT], magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]) and functional (positron emission tomography [PET]) imaging, observation is generally indicated, whereas salvage surgery is indicated in the absence of an adequate response (algorithm 1). (See "Management of the neck following definitive radiotherapy or without chemoradiotherapy in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma".)The risk of developing nodal metastases varies by primary tumor site and factors such as size, histology, tumor thickness, and perineural invasion. When the probability of occult metastases exceeds 15 to 20 percent, the risk of neck recurrence without elective (prophylactic) treatment is sufficiently high to outweigh the morbidity of neck dissection and/or irradiation. (See "Management and prevention of complications during initial treatment of head and neck cancer" and "Management of late complications of head and neck cancer and its treatment".)Reconstruction and rehabilitation — Surgical resection of the mandible, palate, and the larynx can lead to problems in airway management, mastication, deglutition, speech, and cosmesis. Function is also impaired by radiation therapy and chemoradiotherapy.●Prosthetic rehabilitation of patients with hard palate defects (the result of tumor resections involving the maxilla) consists of placement of an obturator prosthesis, which serves to restore orofacial functions, including deglutition, control of secretions, mastication, and phonetics, and to aesthetically replace the missing orofacial structures. The obturator fills a defect in the palate that causes velopharyngeal incompetency (VPI), which would otherwise allow a food bolus to go into the sinonasal cavity, and result in a hyporesonant, non-intelligible speech quality. (See "Management of acquired maxillary defects: Prosthetic rehabilitation after head and neck cancer surgery".)●Surgical reconstruction alone or combined with an obturator prosthesis can be used to remedy palatal defects. In addition, a variety of reconstruction options, including free flaps and autogenous (fibular) bone flaps, are available to restore mandibular defects. (See "Mandibular and palatal reconstruction in patients with head and neck cancer".)●Speech and swallowing rehabilitation are critical to restoring function and quality of life following both surgery and radiation therapy. (See "Speech and swallowing rehabilitation of the patient with head and neck cancer" and "Alaryngeal speech rehabilitation".)Complications — Toxicity associated with treatment for head and neck cancer (whether surgery, radiation therapy, and/or chemotherapy) is substantial and every effort should be made to minimize side effects and treat these complications.In addition to the acute effects associated with treatment, delayed toxicity can have an important effect on quality of life. (See "Management and prevention of complications during initial treatment of head and neck cancer" and "Management of late complications of head and neck cancer and its treatment" and "Quality of life in head and neck cancer".)Posttreatment evaluation and surveillance — Regular posttreatment follow-up is an essential part of the care of patients after potentially curative treatment of head and neck cancer. Patients should be educated about possible signs and symptoms of a second primary cancer and local regional recurrence, including hoarseness, pain, dysphagia, bleeding, and enlarged lymph nodes. (See "Posttreatment surveillance of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck".)Upon completion of therapy, posttreatment imaging is important to evaluate for residual disease and establish a baseline. Our approach is to conduct a clinical evaluation around six weeks following RT or chemoradiotherapy and then a complete evaluation including imaging (CT, PET/CT, or MRI) at 12 weeks to document regression of the primary tumor. Imaging should not be performed too soon. Obtaining imaging studies, particularly PET-CT, prior to 12 weeks following treatment can lead to an increased frequency of false positive results. CT or MRI can be carried out at four to six weeks if needed as part of the clinical evaluation. (See "Overview of the diagnosis and staging of head and neck cancer".) For patients who have clinically involved cervical lymph node disease prior to RT or chemoradiotherapy, functional imaging (PET) and structural imaging (CT/MRI) are important components of the assessment of response to initial therapy (algorithm 1). (See 'Management of the neck' above and "Management of the neck following definitive radiotherapy or without chemoradiotherapy in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma".)Following treatment, the intensity of follow-up is greatest in the first two to four years. Approximately 80 to 90 percent of all recurrences occur within this timeframe; the risk of a second primary malignancy is higher than recurrence risk for most patients beyond three years. However, continued follow-up is generally suggested since the morbidity of treatment can worsen over time and the risk of recurrence and second primary malignancy remains elevated beyond the first five years, especially for cancers of the hypopharynx, larynx, nasopharynx, and salivary glands. Because of the higher risk of recurrence and second primary malignancy in those who continue tobacco use, many schedule more frequent surveillance visits for these patients and continue for longer duration (ie, beyond five years).Locally recurrent disease — Although most patients with recurrent disease have a poor prognosis, those with only locoregional disease may benefit from definitive treatment. All patients with locoregionally recurrent disease should be evaluated for distant metastases prior to initiating retreatment. Those with a good performance status and whose disease is confined to the head and neck may benefit from surgical salvage and/or radiation or reirradiation, although treatment options are limited by the previous treatment received. (See "Treatment of locally recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck" and "Reirradiation for locally recurrent head and neck cancer".)Metastatic disease — Palliative chemotherapy and/or supportive care is the most appropriate option for many patients with locally recurrent metastatic disease that is not amenable to definitive therapy, as well as for patients who have widely disseminated disease. (See "Treatment of metastatic and recurrent head and neck cancer".)SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES — Some malignancies arising in the mucosa of the upper aerodigestive tract have unusual histology or biology, which can have important implications for patient management. These are briefly discussed here, and more detailed discussions are provided in other topics, as noted below. Non-mucosal malignancies (eg, thyroid, base of skull) are discussed in the relevant site-specific topics.Human papillomavirus associated oropharyngeal cancer — Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is a causative agent for many head and neck squamous cell carcinomas arising in the oropharynx (tonsils and base of tongue). HPV associated cancers have increased dramatically and have substantially altered the epidemiology of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma. These tumors define a distinct subset of patients who have frequent lymph node involvement and an improved prognosis compared with HPV-negative, tobacco-driven oropharynx cancers. (See "Human papillomavirus associated head and neck cancer".)Clinical trials are underway to define the optimal treatment for these patients, with the goal of maximizing long-term cure rates while minimizing toxicity, including treatment de-intensification. Currently, however, the approach remains the same as for patients whose tumors are not HPV related, and the use of HPV status in clinical decision making remains investigational. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma — Nasopharyngeal carcinoma differs from other head and neck cancers in its epidemiology, pathology, natural history, and treatment. (See "Epidemiology, etiology, and diagnosis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma".)Radiation therapy (RT) is the mainstay of treatment for locoregional nasopharyngeal cancer, but the integration of chemotherapy has been instrumental in improving survival for most stage II, and advanced stage disease (III and IV). Surgery is not typically used because of the deep anatomical location of the nasopharynx and its close proximity to critical neurovascular structures and the base of skull. (See "Treatment of early and locoregionally advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma" and "Treatment of recurrent and metastatic nasopharyngeal carcinoma".)Nasal vestibule and nasal cavity cancers — Tumors of the nasal vestibule are essentially skin cancers and are treated with surgery and/or RT, depending on size and location within the nasal vestibule. Cancers of the nasal cavity are similar to those that occur in the paranasal sinuses, and have a wide variety of histologies. Both early and moderately advanced tumors of the nasal cavity are treated with surgical resection and postoperative radiation. (See "Cancer of the nasal vestibule" and "Tumors of the nasal cavity" and "Paranasal sinus cancer".)Paranasal sinus cancer — Paranasal sinus cancers encompass multiple histologies, with adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma being predominant. Aggressive surgical resection remains the mainstay of treatment, but multimodality approaches with surgery, RT, and chemotherapy may be appropriate for certain histologies and for advanced stage cancers. (See "Paranasal sinus cancer".)Salivary gland cancers — Salivary gland tumors consist of a wide array of benign and malignant histologies that occur in salivary gland tissue throughout the head and neck. Surgical resection of the salivary gland is important both for diagnosis and treatment. Patients with benign and low-grade tumors are typically treated with surgery alone, whereas patients with high-grade carcinomas and other high-risk features are usually treated with surgery and postoperative RT.●(See "Salivary gland tumors: Epidemiology, diagnosis, evaluation, and staging".)●(See "Salivary gland tumors: Treatment of locoregional disease".)●(See "Malignant salivary gland tumors: Treatment of recurrent and metastatic disease".)Squamous cell carcinoma of unknown primary — Squamous cell carcinomas of unknown primary that involve the upper cervical lymph nodes most likely originate from a head and neck primary. Many are squamous cell carcinomas, and are often HPV positive, suggesting an occult oropharynx primary. Clinical, imaging, and surgical staging is required to seek a primary. Many centers are advocating functional tongue base resection and/or tonsillectomy in order to locate the microscopic primary site. If none is found, these are treated with curative intent using RT to the oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal mucosa, and the neck. In contrast, squamous cell carcinomas involving the lower neck may represent distant metastases from a head and neck, esophagus, lung, gastrointestinal, or genitourinary tract primary, so treatment is directed to the neck only and individualized. Patients without other obvious sites of metastatic disease (eg, lung, liver, or bone) should be treated with definitive therapy for locoregional disease. (See "Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma of unknown primary".)INFORMATION FOR PATIENTS — UpToDate offers two types of patient education materials, “The Basics” and “Beyond the Basics.” The Basics patient education pieces are written in plain language, at the 5th to 6th grade reading level, and they answer the four or five key questions a patient might have about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who want a general overview and who prefer short, easy-to-read materials. Beyond the Basics patient education pieces are longer, more sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are written at the 10th to 12th grade reading level and are best for patients who want in-depth information and are comfortable with some medical jargon.Here are the patient education articles that are relevant to this topic. We encourage you to print or e-mail these topics to your patients. (You can also locate patient education articles on a variety of subjects by searching on “patient info” and the keyword(s) of interest.)●Basics topic (see "Patient information: Throat cancer (The Basics)")SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS●Treatment for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma requires a consideration of tumor site and stage, the functional outcomes and morbidity associated with various treatment approaches, and patient-specific factors, such as performance status, comorbidities, and preference. ●A multidisciplinary approach, including surgeons, medical oncologists, and radiation oncologists, as well as dentists, speech/swallowing pathologists, dieticians, and rehabilitation therapists, all with adequate expertise, is required for planning treatment and managing these patients. (See 'Integrated approach to management' above.)●Patients with localized (stage I and II) head and neck carcinomas are generally managed with either surgery or radiation therapy (RT) alone. However, a combined modality may be required in cases with high-risk features. (See 'Localized (early stage) disease' above.)●Patients with more advanced (stage III, IVA, and IVB) disease are typically managed with a multimodality approach, including both RT and chemotherapy; functional organ preservation approaches are generally preferred. (See 'Locoregionally advanced disease' above and "Locally advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck: Approaches combining chemotherapy and radiation therapy".)●Palliative treatment and/or supportive care are appropriate for most patients with locally recurrent and metastatic disease. However, carefully selected patients with disease confined to the head and neck may benefit from surgical or radiation salvage and/or reirradiation. (See 'Locally recurrent disease' above.)●Treatment of the cervical lymph nodes, even if involvement is clinically occult, is often required. (See 'Management of the neck' above.)●Regular posttreatment follow-up is an essential part of the care of patients after potentially curative treatment of head and neck cancer. (See 'Posttreatment evaluation and surveillance' above.)ACKNOWLEDGMENT — The editorial staff at UpToDate would like to acknowledge Benedito Carneiro, MD, MSc, who contributed to an earlier version of this topic review.
		
