
Neurosurgery


Stereotactic guided insertion of DBS electrodes in neurosurgery



Occupation



Activity sectors

Surgery


Description



Education required



Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery (M.B.B.S.) with Fellowship of the Royal College of Surgeons (F.R.C.S.)

or

Master of Surgery (M.S.)

or

Doctor of Medicine (M.D.)

or

Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine (D.O.)




Neurosurgery (or neurological surgery) is the medical specialty concerned with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment, and rehabilitation of disorders which affect any portion of the nervous system including the brain, spinal cord, peripheral nerves, and extra-cranial cerebrovascular system.[1]



Contents
 [hide] 

1 Education and training

1.1 United States
1.2 United Kingdom


2 Main divisions of neurosurgery
3 Neuropathology
4 Neuroanesthesia
5 Neurosurgery methods
6 Conditions
7 See also
8 References
9 External links



Education and training[edit]
In different countries, there are different requirements for an individual to legally practice neurosurgery, and there are varying methods through which they must be educated. In most countries neurosurgeon training is a minimum period of 7 years after graduating from medical school.
United States[edit]
In the United States, a neurosurgeon must generally complete four years of college, four years of medical school, and seven years of residency (PGY-1-7).[2] Most, but not all, residency programs have some component of basic science or clinical research. Neurosurgeons may pursue an additional training in a fellowship, after residency or in some cases, as a senior resident. These fellowships include pediatric neurosurgery, trauma/neurocritical care, functional and stereotactic surgery, surgical neuro-oncology, radiosurgery, neurovascular surgery, Interventional neuroradiology, peripheral nerve, spine surgery and skull base surgery.[3] In the U.S., neurosurgery is considered a highly competitive specialty composed of 0.6% of all practicing physicians.
United Kingdom[edit]
In the United Kingdom, students must gain entry into medical school. MBBS qualification (Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery) takes 4–6 years depending on the student's route. The newly qualified Doctor must then complete Foundation training lasting two years; this is a paid training program in a hospital or clinical setting covering a range of medical specialties including surgery. Junior doctors then apply to enter the neurosurgical pathway. Unlike most other surgical specialties, it currently has its own independent training pathway which takes around eight years (ST1-8); before being able to sit consultant exams with sufficient amounts of experience and practice behind them. Neurosurgery remains consistently amongst the most competitive medical specialties to obtain entry into.[4]
Main divisions of neurosurgery[edit]
General Neurosurgery is the practice where a neurosurgeon handles most of the neurosurgery conditions including neuro-trauma and other neuro-emergencies such as intracranial hemorrhage. Most level 1 hospitals have this kind of practice.
Specialized branches have developed to cater special and difficult conditions. These specialized branches co-exist with general neurosurgery in more sophisticated hospitals. To practice these higher specialization within neurosurgery, additional higher fellowship training of 1–2 years is expected from the neurosurgeon. Some of these divisions of neurosurgery are:

Vascular and Endovascular neurosurgery
Stereotactic, Functional and Epilepsy neurosurgery
Oncological neurosurgery
Spine neurosurgery
Skull-Base Surgery
Peripheral nerve surgery
Pediatric neurosurgery

Neuropathology[edit]
The pathology confronted by neurosurgeons could be either congenital, acquired, traumatic, infection, neoplastic or degenerative. Conditions like congenital hydrocephalus, pediatric tumors and myelomeningocele are encountered in pediatric age group. Trauma with head or spine injury and AVM bleeds are encountered in young adults. Degenerative spine disease, aneurysm bleeds and Parkinson's disease are encountered in much older population.
The science of Neuropathology is a well developed branch of pathology which immensely help the modern day neurosurgeon.
Neuroanesthesia[edit]
Neuroanesthesia is a highly developed science that is linked to neurosurgery. This branch of medicine plays a very important part in day-to-day neurosurgery.
Neurosurgery methods[edit]


Neurosurgery


Intervention


ICD-10-PCS
00-01


ICD-9-CM
01–05


MeSH
D019635


OPS-301 code:
5-01...5-05


For a satisfactory neurosurgery outcome a reasonable pre-operative diagnosis is essential. Neuroradiology plays a key role not only in diagnosis but also in the operative phase of neurosurgery.
Neuroradiology methods are used in modern neurosurgery diagnosis and treatment. They include computer assisted imaging computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission tomography (PET), magnetoencephalography (MEG), and the stereotactic radiosurgery. Some neurosurgery procedures involve the use of intra-operative MRI and functional MRI.
In conventional open surgery the neurosurgeon opens the skull, uses a large opening to access the brain. Technique of using smaller openings and using microscopes and endoscopes were developed later. With this smaller openings and high clarity microscopic visualization of neural tissue excellent results can be obtained. But, the open methods are still used in trauma or emergency situations[10] Principles of Neurosurgery-Rengachari, Ellenbogen, [11] Neurotrauma and Critical Care of the Brain-Jallo, Loftus .'
Microsurgery is utilized in many aspects of neurological surgery. Microvascular techniques are used in EC-IC by-pass surgery and in restoration carotid endarterectomy. The clipping of an aneurysm is performed under microscopic vision. Minimally invasive spine surgery utilizes microscopes or endoscopes. Procedures such as microdiscectomy, laminectomy, and artificial disc replacement rely on microsurgery.[5]
Using Stereotaxy neurosurgeons can approach a minute target in the brain through a minimal opening. This is used in functional neurosurgery where electrodes are implanted or gene therapy is instituted with high level of accuracy as in the case of Parkinson's disease or Alzheimer's disease. Then in the combination method of open and stereotactic surgery intraventricular hemorrhages could be evacuated successfully.[6]
Minimally invasive endoscopic surgery is utilized by neurosurgeons. Techniques such as endoscopic endonasal surgery is used in pituitary tumors, craniopharyngiomas, chordomas, and the repair of cerebrospinal fluid leaks. Ventricular endoscopy is used in the treatment of intraventricular bleeds, hydrocephalus, colloid cysts and neurocysticercosis. Endonasal endoscopy at times is carried out with neurosurgeons and ENT surgeons as a team.
Repair of craniofacial disorders and disturbance of cerebrospinal fluid circulation is done by neurosurgeons, and at times teaming up with maxillofacial and plastic surgeons. Cranioplasty for craniosynostosis is performed by pediatric neurosurgeons with or without plastic surgeons.
Neurosurgeons are involved in Stereotactic Radiosurgery along with Radiation Oncologists in tumor and AVM treatment[13]Intracranial Stereotactic Radiosurgery-Lunsford, Sheehan, [14]Spine Radiosurgery-Gerszten, Ryu. Radiosurgical methods such as Gamma knife, Cyberknife and Novalis Shaped Beam Surgery are used.[7]
Endovascular Neurosurgery utilize endovascular image guided procedures for the treatment of aneurysms, AVMs, carotid stenosis, strokes, and spinal malformations, and vasospasms. Techniques such as angioplasty, stenting, clot retrieval, embolization, and diagnostic angiography are endovascular procedures.[8]
A common procedure performed in neurosurgery is the placement of Ventriculo-Peritoneal Shunt (VP Shunt). In pediatric practice this is for congenital hydrocephalus. The commonest indication in adults is Normal Pressure Hydrocephalus (NPH).
Neurosurgery of the spine covers cervical, thoracic and lumbar spine. Some indications for spine surgery are spinal cord compression from trauma, arthritis or spondylosis. In cervical cord compression patients may have gait difficulty, balance issues, numbness and tingling in hands or feet. Spondylosis is spinal disc degeneration and arthritis that compresses the spinal canal resulting in bone spurring and disc herniation. Power drills and special instruments are used to correct any compression to the spinal canal. Disk herniations of spinal vertebral disks are removed by Kerrison pitiutary rongeurs. This is called a discectomy. Laminectomy is removing Lamina portion of the vertebra of the spine to make room for the compressed nerve tissue. Minimally invasive, radiology assisted spine surgery include vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty where some kinds of spinal fractures are managed[12] Essentials of Spinal Cord Injury-Fehlings, Vaccaro, Boakye et al.
Pain surgery handled by the neurosurgeons include implantation of deep brain stimulators, spinal cord stimulators and pain pumps [9] Functional Neurosurgery-Starr, Barbaro, Larson. Surgery of the peripheral nervous system include carpal tunnel decompression and peripheral nerve transposition.
Conditions[edit]
Other conditions treated by neurosurgeons include:

Meningitis and other central nervous system infections including abscesses
Spinal disc herniation
Cervical spinal stenosis and Lumbar spinal stenosis
Hydrocephalus
Head trauma (brain hemorrhages, skull fractures, etc.)
Spinal cord trauma
Traumatic injuries of peripheral nerves
Tumors of the spine, spinal cord and peripheral nerves
Intracerebral hemorrhage, such as subarachnoid hemorrhage, interdepartmental, and intracellular hemorrhages
Some forms of drug-resistant epilepsy
Some forms of movement disorders (advanced Parkinson's disease, chorea) – this involves the use of specially developed minimally invasive stereotactic techniques (functional, stereotactic neurosurgery) such as ablative surgery and deep brain stimulation surgery
Intractable pain of cancer or trauma patients and cranial/peripheral nerve pain
Some forms of intractable psychiatric disorders
Vascular malformations (i.e., arteriovenous malformations, venous angiomas, cavernous angiomas, capillary telangectasias) of the brain and spinal cord
Moyamoya disease

See also[edit]

Harvey Cushing – known as the father of modern neurosurgery
Gazi Yaşargil – known as the father of microneurosurgery
Ludvig Puusepp – known as one of the founding fathers of modern neurosurgery, world's first professor of neurosurgery
Walter Dandy – known as one of the founding fathers of modern neurosurgery
Hirotaro Narabayashi – a pioneer of stereotaxic neurosurgery
Alim-Louis Benabid – known as one of the developers of deep brain stimulation surgery for movement disorder
Wilder Penfield – known as one of the founding fathers of modern neurosurgery, and pioneer of epilepsy neurosurgery
Joseph Ransohoff – known for his pioneering use of medical imaging and catheterization in neurosurgery, and for founding the first neurosurgery intensive care unit
Robert F. Spetzler  – The most prolific vascular neurosurgeon in the world and director of the Barrow Neurological Institute
Lars Leksell – Swedish neurosurgeon who developed the Gamma Knife
Benjamin Carson – renowned pediatric neurosurgeon at Johns Hopkins Hospital, pioneer in hemispherectomy, and pioneer in the separation of craniopagus twins (joined at the head)
John R. Adler – Stanford University neurosurgeon who invented the CyberKnife
Wirginia Maixner – pediatric neurosurgeon at Melbourne's Royal Children's Hospital. Primarily known for separating conjoined Bangladeshi twins, Trishna and Krishna
Sid Watkins – world renowned neurosurgeon who served for 26 years as the Formula One Safety and Medical Delegate (race doctor)
Frank Henderson Mayfield – invented the Mayfield skull clamp
Ayub K. Ommaya – invented the Ommaya reservoir
American Association of Neurological Surgeons
Congress of Neurological Surgeons
Polyaxial screw

References[edit]


Jump up ^ AANS – Patient Information
Jump up ^ ABNS.org
Jump up ^ http://www.aans.org/medical_students/questions.asp
Jump up ^ "The society of British neurological surgeons". Retrieved 2011-03-11. [dead link]
Jump up ^ Cyber Museum of Neurosurgery
Jump up ^ http://www.world-sci.com/read.aspx?id=135
Jump up ^ Stereotactic Radiosurgery Program | UCLA Neurosurgery
Jump up ^ Neuroradiology – Information for Patients & Referring Physicians


External links[edit]

The Brain that Changed Everything by Luke Dittrich – Esquire, November 2010






[show]


v
t
e


Medicine






Specialties
and
subspecialties





Surgery









Cardiac surgery
Cardiothoracic surgery
Colorectal surgery
Eye surgery
General surgery
Neurosurgery
Oral and maxillofacial surgery
Orthopedic surgery
Hand surgery
Otolaryngology (ENT)
Pediatric surgery
Plastic surgery
Reproductive surgery
Surgical oncology
Thoracic surgery
Transplant surgery
Trauma surgery
Urology

Andrology


Vascular surgery








Internal medicine









Allergy / Immunology
Angiology (Vascular Medicine)
Cardiology
Endocrinology
Gastroenterology

Hepatology


Geriatrics
Hematology
Hospital medicine
Infectious disease
Nephrology
Oncology
Pulmonology
Rheumatology








Obstetrics and gynaecology









Gynaecology
Gynecologic oncology
Maternal-fetal medicine
Obstetrics
Reproductive endocrinology and infertility
Urogynecology








Diagnostic









Radiology

Interventional radiology, Nuclear medicine


Pathology

Anatomical pathology, Clinical pathology, Clinical chemistry, Clinical immunology, Cytopathology, Medical microbiology, Transfusion medicine










Other specialties









Addiction medicine
Adolescent medicine
Anesthesiology
Dermatology
Disaster medicine
Diving medicine (Undersea and hyperbaric medicine)
Emergency medicine

Mass-gathering medicine


Family medicine
General practice
Hospital medicine
Intensive-care medicine
Medical genetics
Neurology

Clinical neurophysiology


Occupational medicine
Ophthalmology
Oral medicine
Pain management
Palliative care
Pediatrics

Neonatology


Physical medicine and rehabilitation (Physiatry)
Preventive medicine
Psychiatry
Radiation oncology
Reproductive medicine
Sexual medicine
Sleep medicine
Sports medicine
Transplantation medicine
Tropical medicine

Travel medicine













Medical education



Medical school
Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery
Bachelor of Medical Sciences
Master of Medicine
Master of Surgery
Doctor of Medicine
Doctor Medicinae (Denmark and Norway)
Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine
MD-PhD








Related topics



Allied health

Dentistry
Podiatry


Nanomedicine
Molecular oncology
Personalized medicine
Veterinary medicine











Physician
History of medicine
Category:Medicine
Portal:Medicine













[show]


v
t
e


Surgery, Nervous system: neurosurgical and other procedures (ICD-9-CM V3 01–05+89.1, ICD-10-PCS 00–01)






Skull



Craniotomy
Decompressive craniectomy
Cranioplasty








CNS




Brain




thalamus and globus pallidus:



Thalamotomy
Thalamic stimulator
Pallidotomy








ventricular system:



Ventriculostomy
Suboccipital puncture
Intracranial pressure monitoring








cerebrum:



Psychosurgery

Lobotomy
Bilateral cingulotomy


Hemispherectomy
Anterior temporal lobectomy








pituitary gland:



Hypophysectomy








hippocampus:



Amygdalohippocampectomy











Brain biopsy











Cerebral meninges



Meningeal biopsy








Spinal cord and spinal canal



Spinal cord and roots

Cordotomy
Rhizotomy


Vertebrae and intervertebral discs: see Template:Bone, cartilage, and joint procedures








Medical imaging



Computed tomography of the head
Cerebral angiography
Pneumoencephalography
Echoencephalography/Transcranial Doppler
Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain
Brain PET
Myelography








Diagnostic



Electroencephalography
Lumbar puncture
Polysomnography








CPRs



Glasgow Coma Scale
Mini–mental state examination
National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale
CHADS2 score











PNS




Cranial and peripheral nerves



Nerve block
Vagotomy








Sympathetic nerves or ganglia



Ganglionectomy
Sympathectomy

Endoscopic thoracic sympathectomy










Nerves (general)



Axotomy
Neurectomy
Nerve biopsy








Diagnostic



Nerve conduction study
Electromyography








Medical imaging



Magnetic resonance neurography
















Index of the central nervous system


v
t
e










Description



Anatomy

meninges
cortex

association fibers
commissural fibers


lateral ventricles
basal ganglia
diencephalon
mesencephalon
fourth ventricle
pons
cerebellum
medulla
spinal cord


Physiology
Development








Disease



Meningitis
Demylinating diseases
Seizures and epilepsy
Headache
Stroke
Sleep
Congenital
Injury
Neoplasms and cancer
Other
Symptoms and signs

head and neck
eponymous
lesions










Treatment



Procedures
Drugs

general anesthetics
analgesics
addiction
epilepsy
cholinergics
migraine
parkinson
vertigo
other











Index of the peripheral nervous system


v
t
e










Description



Anatomy
Nerves

cranial
trigeminal
cervical
brachial
lumbosacral plexus
somatosensory
spinal
autonomic


Physiology

reflexes
proteins
neurotransmitters
transporters


Development

neurotrophins










Disease



Autonomic
Congenital
Injury
Neoplasms and cancer
Other
Symptoms and signs

eponymous










Treatment



Procedures
Local anesthetics
















[show]


v
t
e


Neuroscience






Science



Affective neuroscience
Behavioral epigenetics
Behavioral neurology
Behavioral genetics
Behavioral neuroscience
Brain–computer interface
Cellular neuroscience
Chronobiology
Clinical neurophysiology
Clinical neuroscience
Cognitive neuroscience
Computational neuroscience
Connectomics
Cultural neuroscience
Evolutionary neuroscience
Imaging genetics
Integrative neuroscience
Molecular cellular cognition
Molecular neuroscience
Motor or Movement neuroscience
Neural development
Neural engineering
Neural network (artificial)
Neural network (biological)
Neural signal processing
Neural tissue regeneration
Neuroanatomy
Neurobioengineering
Neurobiology
Neurobiotics
Neurocardiology
Neurochemistry
Neurochip
Neurodegeneration
Neurodevelopmental disorders
Neurodiversity
Neuroembryology
Neuroendocrinology
Neuroepidemiology
Neuroethology
Neurogastroenterology
Neurogenetics
Neuroimaging
Neuroimmunology
Neuroinformatics
Neurointensive care
Neurology
Neurometrics
Neuromodulation
Neuromorphology
Neuromonitoring
Neurooncology
Neuro-ophthalmology
Neuropathology
Neuropharmacology
Neurophysics
Neurophysiology
Neuroplasticity
Neuroprosthetics
Neuropsychiatry
Neuroradiology
Neurorehabilitation
Neurorobotics
Neurosurgery
Neurotechnology
Neurotology
Neurotoxin
Neurotransmitter
Neurovirology
Paleoneurology
Psychiatry
Sensory neuroscience
Social neuroscience
Systems neuroscience











Non-Science



Educational neuroscience
Neuroanthropology
Neurocriminology
Neuroeconomics
Neuroeducation
Neuroepistemology
Neuroesthetics
Neuroethics
Neurohistory
Neurolaw
Neurolinguistics
Neuromanagement
Neuromarketing
Neurophenomenology
Neurophilosophy
Neuropolitics
Neuro-psychoanalysis
Neuropsychology
Neurosociology
Neurotheology











 Book
 Category
 Commons















&lt;img src="//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1" alt="" title="" width="1" height="1" style="border: none; position: absolute;" /&gt;
