
			INTRODUCTION — Coarctation of the aorta is a narrowing of the descending aorta, which is typically located at the insertion of the ductus arteriosus just distal to the left subclavian artery (figure 1). This defect generally results in left ventricular pressure overload.The clinical manifestations and diagnosis of coarctation of the aorta will be reviewed here. The management of coarctation, including corrective treatment options and outcome, such as the risk of recurrent coarctation, is discussed separately. (See "Management of coarctation of the aorta".)EPIDEMIOLOGY — Coarctation of the aorta accounts for 4 to 6 percent of all congenital heart defects with a reported prevalence of about 4 per 10,000 live births [1,2]. It occurs more commonly in males than in females (59 versus 41 percent) [3]. Most cases are sporadic.PATHOGENESIS AND ETIOLOGY — Although there are acquired causes, the etiology of coarctation of the aorta is generally congenital.Congenital — The vast majority of coarctation cases are congenital. Although the precise pathogenesis is unknown, the two main theories for the development of congenital coarctation of the aorta are:●Reduced antegrade intrauterine blood flow causing underdevelopment of the fetal aortic arch [4]●Migration or extension of ductal tissue into the wall of the fetal thoracic aorta [5-7]Pathologic examination of patients with congenital coarctation of the aorta reveals medial thickening and intimal hyperplasia at the coarctation site forming a posterolateral ridge that encircles the aortic lumen. There is also increasing evidence of a vascular wall defect in the ascending aorta of individuals with congenital coarctation of aorta. The following are reported aortic wall abnormalities in neonates with coarctation of the aorta [8-10]:●In a study that evaluated the elastic properties of the aortic wall, newborns with coarctation of the aorta, both before and after surgical repair, had increased aortic wall stiffness and decreased aortic distensibility compared with neonates without coarctation [8].●Pathologic analysis from surgical specimens showed increased collagen and decreased smooth muscle mass in the prestenotic compared with poststenotic segments of patients with coarctation [9].●Histologic examination of surgical or autopsy specimens revealed cystic medial necrosis, defined as depletion and disarray of elastic tissue [10]. In some cases, the findings were present at or near birth, suggesting that these changes occurred in utero.The underlying mechanism for these arterial wall abnormalities is unknown. There may be a role for genetic defects and/or intrauterine insults such as impaired blood flow that alter endothelial development and that result in disturbances in the elastic properties and narrowing of the aorta. The intrinsic defect in the aortic wall appears to predispose to dissection or rupture in the ascending aorta or in the area of the coarctation repair.Genetic factors — A genetic predisposition is suggested by reports of coarctation occurring in family members [11-13] and by its association with Turner syndrome.●There is evidence of an increased familial risk for congenital left ventricular outflow tract obstruction malformations (LVOTO) including coarctation of the aorta [11,12]. This was shown in a study of family members of 124 patients with LVOTO [11]. Thirty of the 351 (9 percent) relatives who were evaluated had asymptomatic LVOTO structural heart defects that included abnormalities in the aortic arch (three), left ventricle (five), and aortic valve (21). Segregation analysis suggests these findings may be the result of one or more minor loci with rare dominant alleles.●In patients with Turner syndrome (females with a loss of an X chromosome), the reported incidence of coarctation of the aorta is between 3 and 10 percent. (See "Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of Turner syndrome (gonadal dysgenesis)", section on 'Cardiovascular disease'.)Acquired — In addition to a congenital etiology, aortic narrowing can be an acquired abnormality due to inflammatory diseases of the aorta, such as Takayasu arteritis or, rarely, severe atherosclerosis [14-16]. In the former disorder, the midthoracic or abdominal aorta is often the site of involvement [14,15]. (See "Clinical features and diagnosis of Takayasu arteritis".)ANATOMYAnatomical variants — Although most patients have a discrete narrowing of the descending aorta at the insertion of the ductus arteriosus, there is a spectrum of aortic narrowing that encompasses the usual discrete thoracic lesions, long-segmental defects, tubular hypoplasia, and, rarely, coarctation located in the abdominal aorta.Other cardiac lesions — Coarctation of the aorta is usually accompanied by another cardiac lesion [17-19].●In a large case series of 1892 patients from Boston Children’s Hospital, only 7 percent of cases did not have any other cardiac anomaly other than bicuspid aortic valve [18]. About one-third of patients had other complex cardiac defects (including single ventricle variants, atrioventricular [AV] canal defect, or D-transposition of the great arteries [d-TGA]); 18 percent had a ventricular septal defect (VSD). In the remaining 806 patients (42 percent) who were classified as uncomplicated coarctation, other cardiac anomalies included bicuspid aortic valve (50 percent), atrial septal defect or patent ductus arteriosus ([PDA], 38 percent), mitral regurgitation (35 percent), aortic stenosis (29 percent), aortic regurgitation (28 percent), and mitral stenosis (16 percent); no other lesions were detected in only 17 percent of uncomplicated cases.●In a second case series of 216 infants (less than one year of age) from Michigan, 48 percent of patients were diagnosed with complex coarctation due to the presence of other cardiac defects including VSD, aortic and subaortic stenosis, AV canal defect, and d-TGA [19]. The remaining 113 patients were diagnosed with simple coarctation; however, PDA occurred in 48 patients (42 percent). As a result, about one-third of affected infants did not have another detected cardiac anomaly. In this series, it is unclear whether an evaluation to detect the presence of bicuspid aortic valve was performed.●In a third case series of 500 patients, who were primarily adult patients referred for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 17 percent had no additional cardiovascular anomalies [17]. In this cohort, bicuspid aortic valves, arch hypoplasia, VSD, and PDA were detected in 60, 14, 13, and 7 percent of patients, respectively.PATHOPHYSIOLOGY — Coarctation of the aorta does not cause a hemodynamic problem in utero, as two-thirds of the combined cardiac output flows through the patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) into the descending thoracic aorta, bypassing the site of constriction at the isthmus (figure 2).During the neonatal period, when the patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) and foramen ovale (between the right and left atria) begin to close, the cardiac output that must cross the narrowed aortic segment to reach the lower extremities steadily increases. With these changes the hemodynamic changes may range from mild systolic hypertension to severe heart failure depending upon the severity of the coarctation and upon the presence of other associated lesions.At birth, the left ventricular afterload increases because of outflow tract obstruction resulting in increased systolic pressure in the left ventricle and proximal aorta. In cases of severe obstruction, the systolic pressure gradient may reach 50 to 60 mmHg at rest.Several compensatory mechanisms arise to surmount the left ventricular outflow tract obstruction (LVOTO). These include left ventricular myocardial hypertrophy, which maintains normal systolic function and ejection fraction, and the development of collateral blood flow involving the intercostal, internal mammary, and scapular vessels, which circumvents the stenotic lesion [18,19]. However, in neonates with severe lesions, heart failure may develop because there is insufficient time for the development of myocardial hypertrophy or collateral blood flow.Other cardiac lesions may add further strain on ventricular function. Valvar and subvalvar aortic stenosis may further increase left ventricular systolic pressure and afterload, whereas a large ventricular septal defect, PDA, or mitral regurgitation will increase left ventricular end-diastolic volume and preload, which subsequently leads to increased left ventricular end-diastolic pressure and to pulmonary artery hypertension. These patients with complex coarctation are likely to develop heart failure and pulmonary artery hypertension.CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONSManifestations according to age — The clinical manifestations of coarctation vary in different age groups. (See "Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of patent ductus arteriosus".)Neonates — The newborn infant may remain asymptomatic if there is a persistent patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) or if the coarctation is not severe. On physical examination, a clinical diagnosis is made if there is an absent or delayed femoral pulse (when compared with the brachial pulse). A murmur may be associated with other cardiac defects, such as PDA, aortic stenosis, or ventricular septal defect (VSD). A systolic click may be heard due to a bicuspid aortic valve. Differential cyanosis is seen in a neonate with severe coarctation of the aorta, and with a large PDA with a right-to-left shunt into the descending thoracic aorta.A neonate with severe coarctation may present with heart failure and/or shock when the PDA closes (image 1). These patients are pale, irritable, diaphoretic, and dyspneic with absent femoral pulses and, often, hepatomegaly. The pulses may be poor in all four extremities. In the clinical setting of neonatal shock, important diagnoses to consider include severe coarctation, sepsis, and metabolic abnormalities. (See "Management of coarctation of the aorta", section on 'Critical coarctation in infancy' and "Etiology and diagnosis of heart failure in infants and children", section on 'Clinical manifestations' and "Inborn errors of metabolism: Epidemiology, pathogenesis, and clinical features" and "Inborn errors of metabolism: Metabolic emergencies".)Older infants and children — Diagnosis is often delayed in older infants and children because physical findings are subtle and because most patients are asymptomatic. With careful history taking, some patients will report chest pain, cold extremities, and claudication with physical exertion. However, these are often noted after the diagnosis of coarctation is made.Careful measurement of blood pressure and palpation of pulses in all four extremities suggest the clinical diagnosis with differential pressures between the upper and lower extremities or pulse delay in the lower extremities. In young children, coarctation of the aorta may present with hypertension and/or murmurs resulting from collaterals or associated heart defects. Heart failure rarely occurs beyond the neonatal period.Adults — In previously undiagnosed adults, the classic presenting sign is hypertension. Despite the variability in blood pressure in the upper and lower extremities, regional blood flow is generally maintained within normal limits by autoregulatory vasoconstriction in the hypertensive areas and by vasodilation in the hypotensive areas [20]. Most patients are asymptomatic unless severe hypertension is present, which may lead to headache, epistaxis, heart failure, or aortic dissection. In addition, claudication of the lower extremities can occur due to reduced flow, especially with physical exertion.Natural history — Data on the natural history of coarctation of the aorta are largely derived from hospital postmortem records and from case series prior to the availability of operative repair (introduced in 1945) [21]. The average survival age of individuals with unoperated coarctation was approximately 35 years of age, with 75 percent mortality by 46 years of age [22]. Common complications in unoperated patients or in those operated on during later childhood or adulthood were systemic hypertension, accelerated coronary artery disease, stroke, aortic dissection, and heart failure. Causes of death include heart failure, aortic rupture, aortic dissection, endocarditis, endarteritis, intracerebral hemorrhage, and myocardial infarction [21,22]. Patients with an associated bicuspid aortic valve may also develop significant aortic stenosis or aortic regurgitation. (See "Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of bicuspid aortic valve in adults".)Physical findings — The findings of differential systolic blood pressures between the upper and lower extremities or pulse delay in the lower extremities suggest a diagnosis of coarctation of the aorta, which is usually confirmed by echocardiography or alternate imaging modalities. (See 'Diagnosis' below.)Blood pressure and pulses — The classic findings of coarctation of the aorta are systolic hypertension in the upper extremities, diminished or delayed femoral pulses (brachial-femoral delay), and low or unobtainable arterial blood pressure in the lower extremities (figure 3) [23]. (See "Evaluation of secondary hypertension" and "Definition and diagnosis of hypertension in children and adolescents", section on 'Technique of BP measurement'.)In our practice, we follow the recommendations outlined by the 2008 American College of Cardiology (ACC)/American Heart Association (AHA) guidelines for adults with congenital heart disease to screen for coarctation in both hypertensive children and adults [22]:●Every patient with systemic arterial hypertension should have the brachial and femoral pulses palpated simultaneously to assess timing and amplitude to search for the “brachial-femoral delay” of significant aortic coarctation (figure 3). (See "Examination of the arterial pulse", section on 'Unequal or delayed pulses'.)●Supine bilateral arm (brachial artery) blood pressures and prone right or left supine leg (popliteal) blood pressures should be measured to search for differential pressure.The site of origin of the left subclavian artery and the severity of the coarctation determine the pattern of pulse and blood pressure findings:●In most cases, the origin of the left subclavian artery is proximal to the coarctation, resulting in hypertension in both arms (figure 1).●Less often, the origin of the left subclavian artery is just distal to the coarctation, so the left brachial pulse is diminished and is equal to the femoral pulse.●In approximately 3 to 4 percent of cases, both the right and left subclavian arteries originate below the area of coarctation, resulting in the blood pressures and pulses that are equally decreased in all four extremities.●In mild coarctation of the aorta, all the pulses may be easily palpable, but there may be a delay in the femoral pulse compared with the brachial pulse.The mechanical obstruction to flow is largely responsible for the elevation of blood pressure in the upper extremities. In addition, renal hypoperfusion may lead to enhanced renin secretion and to subsequent volume expansion [24]. Volume expansion produces a further elevation in blood pressure, restoring renal perfusion and renin secretion toward normal.Because other conditions can also cause unequal pulses and blood pressures (eg, atherosclerotic disease, aortic dissection), these disorders should also be considered when pulse and blood pressure discrepancies are found. (See 'Differential diagnosis' below and "Examination of the arterial pulse", section on 'Unequal or delayed pulses'.)When coarctation of the aorta is accompanied by substantial collaterals, the femoral pulses may be less diminished, and the gradient (differential systolic blood pressures) across the coarctation may be less severe than expected for the degree of obstruction [22].Cardiac examination — Cardiac auscultation is usually normal if there are no associated cardiac abnormalities [23].●The first and second heart sounds are usually normal. Rarely, pulmonary hypertension is present; when this occurs, the pulmonic component of the second heart sound is accentuated.●There may be an ejection systolic click and a systolic ejection murmur from a bicuspid aortic valve, which is heard best at the apex or left sternal border. (See "Auscultation of heart sounds", section on 'Ejection sounds' and "Auscultation of cardiac murmurs", section on 'Midsystolic ejection murmurs'.)●A systolic murmur can extend beyond the second heart sound, at the left paravertebral interscapular area, due to flow across the narrow coarctation area.●Continuous murmurs may be caused by flow through large collateral vessels. (See "Auscultation of cardiac murmurs", section on 'Continuous murmurs'.)●Systolic murmurs may be present due to coexisting cardiac defects (PDA, VSD, or aortic stenosis).In infants with heart failure, a prominent right ventricular impulse is typical. In older children and adults, the left ventricular impulse is palpable and sustained, and pulsations may be palpable in the intercostal spaces from large collateral arteries. (See "Examination of the precordial pulsation".)Tests — Most patients will undergo initial testing that includes electrocardiography (ECG) and chest radiography. However, the diagnosis is generally confirmed by echocardiography. In some cases, particularly those with complex conditions, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computerized tomography are used to make the diagnosis.Electrocardiogram — ECG varies with age of the patient and severity of the lesion. Even in neonates and young infants with a severe defect, the ECG may be normal and may display the age-appropriate right ventricular hypertrophy. In older children and adults, the ECG either may be normal or may show left ventricular hypertrophy, with increased voltage and ST and T wave changes in the left precordial leads. The ECG will occasionally show right ventricular conduction delay [22]. (See "Electrocardiographic diagnosis of left ventricular hypertrophy".)Chest radiograph — The chest radiograph varies with age and severity of the coarctation.●In infants with heart failure, the chest radiograph shows generalized cardiomegaly with increased pulmonary vascular markings due to pulmonary venous congestion (image 1).●In older children and adults, the heart size may be normal, but the following abnormalities are often present:•Notching of the posterior one-third of the third to eighth ribs due to erosion by the large collateral arteries. Rib notching increases with age and usually becomes apparent between the ages of 4 and 12 years (image 2). Notching is not seen in the anterior ribs because the anterior intercostal arteries are not located in costal grooves [23].•Indentation of the aortic wall at the site of coarctation with pre- and post-coarctation dilatation, which can produce a “3” sign (image 3). Barium swallow and cardiac angiogram, which are no longer performed routinely, may show a reverse “3” or “E” sign (image 4).Noncardiac manifestationsIntracranial hemorrhage — Patients with coarctation of the aorta are at risk for intracranial aneurysms [25-27]. This was best illustrated by a study of 100 patients with coarctation that demonstrated 10 patients had an intracranial aneurysm detected by brain magnetic resonance angiography [27]. This incidence is higher than the reported rate of intracranial aneurysms in the general population (10 versus 2 percent).In addition, subarachnoid or intracerebral hemorrhage has been reported in patients with coarctation. These have primarily occurred in patients between 10 and 30 years of age [26], but cerebral hemorrhage also has been reported in neonates [28]. Hypertension is not a necessary precondition, as cerebral hemorrhage can occur in normotensive or mildly hypertensive patients long after successful coarctation repair [28,29].In addition to the risk of intracranial aneurysms, dilated collateral arteries within the spinal canal may accompany coarctation. These vessels can compress the spinal cord or can rupture, causing a clinical picture of subarachnoid hemorrhage [30-32].Turner syndrome — Because patients with Turner syndrome have about a 10 percent risk of coarctation, all phenotypic female patients should be examined for the dysmorphic features of Turner syndrome:●Neonates may have congenital lymphedema of the hands and feet, a webbed neck, and a low hairline.●Older girls and women are typically short with a broad, shield-shaped chest and with widely spaced nipples.Women with Turner syndrome are generally infertile; however, pregnancy can be achieved through oocyte donation. Cardiac evaluation should be performed before initiating fertility therapy because these patients are at increased risk of death from rupture or dissection of the aorta during pregnancy. (See "Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of Turner syndrome (gonadal dysgenesis)", section on 'Clinical manifestations' and "Management of Turner syndrome (gonadal dysgenesis)", section on 'Fertility'.)DIAGNOSISPrenatal diagnosis — Prenatal diagnosis is difficult, as it is challenging to detect the coarctation by antenatal ultrasound because only 10 percent of the fetal cardiac output flows across the defect (figure 2) [33-35]. In addition, the presence of the patent ductus limits the ability to detect any pressure gradient at the coarctation site, and may also make the anatomic narrowing less marked. If the diagnosis is made, it can be made as early as at 16 to 18 weeks of gestational age. The presence of a long segment coarctation or other cardiac findings (eg, small left ventricle, small mitral annulus, or dilated right ventricle) improves detection.Antenatal detection by echocardiography appears to be improved by serial studies that use transverse views of the aortic and ductal arches, which compare the ratio of the aortic and ductal arches with normative data [36]. Fetuses with coarctation compared with those without coarctation were more likely to have a lower ratio of the distal aortic isthmus to arterial duct diameters.Postnatal diagnosis — The clinical diagnosis of coarctation of the aorta is based upon the characteristic findings of systolic hypertension in the upper extremities, diminished or delayed femoral pulses (brachial-femoral delay), and low or unobtainable arterial blood pressure in the lower extremities. The diagnosis is confirmed by noninvasive imaging methods, particularly echocardiography.Echocardiography — In most patients, high-quality two-dimensional and Doppler echocardiography can establish the diagnosis and severity of coarctation of the aorta, including in neonates with a patent ductus arteriosus [22,37-39]. Echocardiography can also detect associated cardiac defects, including aortic hypoplasia, and can be used for follow-up after repair [37,38].In the high parasternal or suprasternal long axis view, a discrete area of narrowing (posterior shelf) within the lumen of the proximal descending thoracic aorta is typically visualized (image 5). Color and pulsed Doppler echocardiography can localize the area of coarctation by demonstrating increased velocities and turbulence, as well as forward diastolic flow.Continuous wave Doppler can estimate the severity of coarctation based upon the maximal flow velocity across the narrow area, by calculating the pressure gradient across the coarctation with appropriate correction for velocity prior to the site of coarctation. The severity of coarctation can also be estimated by calculating the ratio of the maximal velocity across the coarctation (in the suprasternal view) to the peak velocity in the abdominal aorta (in the subcostal view) [37]. Of note, the presence of collateral blood flow may diminish the gradient across the coarctation measured by Doppler and may be less severe than expected for the degree of obstruction [22]. Therefore, indications for intervention are not based solely upon gradient size. (See "Management of coarctation of the aorta".)Identification of characteristic diastolic run-off should be included in the routine evaluation for coarctation because low amplitude, undulating, continuous Doppler flow within the descending thoracic aorta below the area of coarctation and within the abdominal aorta provides indirect evidence of coarctation. Abnormal flow in collateral vessels may also be detected by color flow and pulse Doppler. Pulsed-wave Doppler assessment of the abdominal aorta in patients with coarctation generally demonstrates reduced and delayed systolic amplitude with persistent flow during diastole. This finding may be the first clue to the echocardiographic diagnosis of coarctation.Because most patients with coarctation will also have other cardiac anomalies, echocardiographic evaluation should also include measurement of the dimensions of the aortic annulus, aortic sinuses, sinotubular ridge, and ascending aorta; identification of aortic valve anatomy; determination of left ventricular size and function; and identification of any potential associated lesions such as ventricular septal defect, subvalvular aortic stenosis, and mitral valve deformity.Magnetic resonance imaging/computed tomography — Magnetic resonance (MR) or computed tomography (CT) angiography clearly defines the location and severity of coarctation of the aorta, as well as collateral vessels (image 6 and image 7 and image 8) [37]. MR imaging (MRI) also may accurately identify patients with significant pressure gradient across the coarctation [40,41].In children with coarctation, echocardiography often is adequate for the surgeon or interventional cardiologist without the need for a further imaging study. However, echocardiography may be insufficient to confirm the diagnosis, especially in adolescent and adult patients. In the 2008 American College of Cardiology and American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) adult congenital heart disease guidelines, it is recommended that every adult patient with coarctation (repaired or not) should have at least one cardiovascular MRI or CT for complete evaluation of the thoracic aorta [22]. MRI can also detect associated cardiac abnormalities and can be used for serial follow-up after surgical repair or balloon angioplasty [38].Cranial MR angiography is also appropriate to search for intracranial aneurysms.If MRI is contraindicated, CT imaging may be used to diagnose coarctation. MRI is generally preferred to CT because of the radiation associated with CT.Cardiac catheterization — Given the accuracy of noninvasive methods for diagnosis and determination of severity [42], cardiac catheterization for an isolated coarctation of the aorta in children is generally performed in conjunction with a therapeutic intervention (eg, stent placement) (image 4 and image 9 and image 10) [42]. Catheterization may also be necessary when coarctation is associated with complex cardiac defects.In adults, cardiac catheterization is indicated when associated coronary artery disease is suspected.DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS — The differential diagnosis for coarctation varies based upon the clinical presentation:●In neonatal heart failure, severe coarctation should be in the differential diagnosis. Other possible causes include severe obstruction to outflow of the left heart (eg, hypoplastic left heart syndrome and severe critical aortic valve stenosis), sepsis, myocarditis, and perinatal hypoxia. Echocardiography distinguishes these disorders from coarctation. (See "Etiology, clinical manifestations, and evaluation of neonatal shock", section on 'Etiology'.)●In patients with unequal pulses and blood pressures, the differential diagnosis includes obstructive peripheral arterial diseases (eg, from atherosclerosis, or arterial thrombosis from prior catheterization), prior surgical ligation (eg, history of classic Blalock-Taussig shunt), aortic dissection, and supravalvar aortic stenosis. Echocardiography distinguishes coarctation from these disorders.INFORMATION FOR PATIENTS — UpToDate offers two types of patient education materials, “The Basics” and “Beyond the Basics.” The Basics patient education pieces are written in plain language, at the 5th to 6th grade reading level, and they answer the four or five key questions a patient might have about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who want a general overview and who prefer short, easy-to-read materials. Beyond the Basics patient education pieces are longer, more sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are written at the 10th to 12th grade reading level and are best for patients who want in-depth information and are comfortable with some medical jargon.Here are the patient education articles that are relevant to this topic. We encourage you to print or e-mail these topics to your patients. (You can also locate patient education articles on a variety of subjects by searching on “patient info” and the keyword(s) of interest.)●Basics links (see "Patient information: Aortic coarctation in adults (The Basics)" and "Patient information: Aortic coarctation in children (The Basics)")SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS●Coarctation of the aorta is a common malformation accounting for 4 to 6 percent of all congenital heart defects with a prevalence of 4 per 10,000 live births. (See 'Epidemiology' above.)●Coarctation of the aorta is generally congenital in origin. The underlying pathogenesis is unknown. There may be a genetic predisposition based upon familial risk of left ventricular outflow tract obstructive (LVOTO) malformations, including coarctation, and upon the association of Turner syndrome with coarctation. (See 'Pathogenesis and etiology' above.) There are rare acquired causes.●There is a spectrum of anatomic variants from the usual discrete thoracic lesions to long-segmental defects, tubular hypoplasia, and, rarely, coarctation of the abdominal aorta. Coarctation of the aorta is usually accompanied by another cardiac lesion including bicuspid aortic valve, ventricular septal defect, or patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). (See 'Anatomy' above.)●The postnatal presentation varies depending upon the age of the patient and the severity of the lesion. (See 'Manifestations according to age' above.)•Neonates may be asymptomatic if there is a persistent PDA or if the coarctation is not severe. However, patients with severe defects may present with heart failure and/or shock when the PDA closes (image 1).•Older infants and children are often asymptomatic and present with hypertension, murmurs caused by collateral blood flow or associated heart defects, or symptoms of chest pain or claudication.•Hypertension is the typical presenting sign in adults.●The classical physical findings are differential systolic blood pressure between the upper and lower extremities and/or delayed femoral pulses. (See 'Physical findings' above.)●Every individual with systemic arterial hypertension should be assessed for the presence of coarctation by palpation of the brachial and femoral pulses to detect the presence of a “brachial-femoral delay”, and by supine bilateral arm blood pressures and prone right or left supine leg blood pressures to detect any differential pressure. (See 'Blood pressure and pulses' above and "Examination of the arterial pulse", section on 'Unequal or delayed pulses'.)●Chest radiographic findings vary with age and severity of the coarctation. In infants with heart failure, the chest radiograph usually shows generalized cardiomegaly with increased pulmonary vascular markings due to pulmonary venous congestion (image 1). In older children and adults, the heart size may remain normal, but other findings include rib notching and the “3” sign (indentation of the aortic wall at the site of coarctation with pre- and post-coarctation dilatation) (image 2 and image 3). (See 'Chest radiograph' above.)●The prenatal diagnosis of coarctation is challenging as it is difficult to detect the narrowing because only 10 percent of the fetal cardiac output flows through the thoracic aorta. (See 'Prenatal diagnosis' above.)●The diagnosis of coarctation is generally confirmed by two-dimensional and Doppler transthoracic echocardiography. In some cases, further imaging with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (image 6) or computerized tomography (CT) (image 7) is needed to confirm the diagnosis, to define the location of the obstruction, and to identify collateral vessels. (See 'Postnatal diagnosis' above and "Management of coarctation of the aorta", section on 'Monitoring'.)
		
