
			INTRODUCTION — The majority of patients with peripheral artery disease (PAD) have atherosclerotic disease of the lower extremity. However, PAD of the upper extremity is not rare and, when present, can manifest with limiting symptoms. Patients with compromise of blood flow to the extremities can present with typical ischemic pain of one or more muscle groups, atypical pain, or no symptoms. Patients with upper extremity peripheral artery disease can have upper-extremity exercise-induced pain. Exercise-induced pain is defined as a reproducible discomfort of a defined group of muscles induced by exercise and relieved with rest due to an imbalance between supply and demand of blood flow. The manifestations of upper extremity peripheral artery disease will be reviewed. Lower extremity peripheral artery disease is discussed in detail elsewhere. (See "Clinical features and diagnosis of lower extremity peripheral artery disease".)UPPER EXTREMITY ARTERIAL ANATOMY — The subclavian arteries provide blood flow to the upper extremities. On the left, the subclavian artery originates directly from the aorta distal to the left common carotid artery. On the right, blood flows first through the innominate artery, which divides into the right common carotid artery and right subclavian artery. The anatomy of the aortic arch can vary (figure 1) and may include an anomalous origin of the subclavian arteries. Retroesophageal subclavian vessels may compress the esophagus causing dysphagia, but the vessel may also be compressed leading to upper extremity ischemia. (See "Vascular rings" and "Overview of dysphagia in adults", section on 'Cardiovascular abnormalities'.)The vertebral arteries most often arise bilaterally as the first branch of the subclavian artery. In approximately 6 percent of patients, the vertebral artery, especially the left, may originate directly from the aortic arch [1]. The subclavian artery passes over the first rib posterior to the anterior scalene muscle (figure 2) and becomes the axillary artery at the lateral margin of the first rib. The axillary artery becomes the brachial artery (figure 3) at the lower margin of the teres major muscle. The brachial artery passes between the biceps and triceps muscles accompanied by the ulnar and median nerves adjacent to the humerus and supplies the soft tissues of the arm. In the antecubital fossa, the brachial artery divides (figure 4) into the radial, interosseus, and ulnar arteries to supply soft tissues of the forearm. Distally at the wrist, the ulnar artery and radial artery supply the hand (figure 5).The collateral circulation around the shoulder is usually sufficient such that flow around a focal area of stenosis in the subclavian artery is well-compensated (figure 6). When the proximal subclavian artery is occluded, blood flow is maintained to the arm via connections between the superior and inferior thyroid arteries; vertebral arteries, intercostals, superior epigastric, and internal thoracic arteries; profunda cervicis and descending branch of the occipital artery; scapular branches of the thyrocervical trunk and the branches of the axillary artery; and the thoracic branches of the axillary artery with the aortic intercostals [2].PRESENTATION — Most patients with upper extremity peripheral artery disease are asymptomatic, and detected only by the finding of asymmetric arm blood pressures.  However, stenosis or occlusion of the proximal upper extremity arteries can lead to symptoms of arm pain with exertion, evidence of distal thromboembolism, acute limb ischemia or chronic ischemic symptoms (ischemic rest pain, digit ulceration).Patients who develop dizziness, or even syncope, during arm exertion may have retrograde blood flow in the vertebral artery to supply the demand of the arm skeletal muscle in the setting of reduced subclavian artery blood flow due to a proximal occlusion. This is referred to as "subclavian steal syndrome." The clinical manifestations and treatment of subclavian steal syndrome are discussed in detail elsewhere. (See "Subclavian steal syndrome", section on 'Physiology'.)Patients who presents with a differential blood pressure in the setting of acute chest pain, however, should be evaluated for an acute aortic syndrome (eg, aortic dissection) or, if the patient has had a prior cardiac bypass, coronary-subclavian steal syndrome. (See "Subclavian steal syndrome", section on 'Coronary-subclavian steal'.)DIAGNOSIS — A diagnosis of upper extremity arterial stenosis may be suspected when a blood pressure difference between the arms is identified during evaluation of vital signs on routine physical examination. A difference in systolic blood pressure of ≥10 mmHg is associated with peripheral artery disease (cerebrovascular, coronary artery, lower extremity, upper extremity) with low sensitivity but high specificity [3-13]. A systematic review identified studies that evaluated differences in upper extremity blood pressures [13]. A difference ≥10 mmHg between the upper extremities significantly increased the risk of having a more than 50 percent subclavian stenosis in a pooled analysis of two arteriography studies (risk ratio [RR] 8.8, 95% CI 3.6-21.2). In a pooled analysis of noninvasive studies, a difference of ≥15 mmHg between the upper extremities was associated with lower extremity peripheral artery disease (RR 2.4, 95% CI 1.5-3.9). An upper extremity pressure differential ≥10 mmHg was predictive of preexisting cerebrovascular disease, increased cardiovascular mortality, and all-cause mortality.The blood pressure differential in the upper extremity can be confirmed in the vascular laboratory and the specific site and severity of stenosis or occlusion identified with segmental arm pressures and duplex ultrasound. With duplex, the ultrasound waveform distal to a proximal stenosis will demonstrate a blunted waveform. If the vessel is occluded, no blood flow will be seen but collateral vessels may be apparent. (See "Noninvasive diagnosis of arterial disease", section on 'Wrist-brachial index' and "Noninvasive diagnosis of arterial disease", section on 'Upper extremity segmental pressures' and "Noninvasive diagnosis of arterial disease", section on 'Duplex imaging'.)If the patient is symptomatic and the diagnosis remains in question, computed tomographic (CT) angiography, magnetic resonance (MR) angiography or digital subtraction arteriography (image 1) may be indicated to establish the diagnosis.Atherosclerosis is the most common cause of ischemic upper extremity disease (table 1), but other causes of upper extremity ischemia include large artery diseases such as arterial injury, arterial dissection, thrombosed aneurysm, atheroembolism, thromboembolism, fibrodysplasia, and arteritis (eg, Takayasu disease, giant cell arteritis), repetitive arterial injury (thoracic outlet syndrome, crutch injury) and small vessel diseases such as vasculitis, occupational injury, sequela of radiation therapy and disorders related to vasoconstriction [14,15].MANAGEMENT — Upper extremity peripheral artery disease is often associated with atherosclerosis involving other large vessels, particularly the carotid, coronary and lower extremity arteries. One study using baseline and longitudinal data for three cohorts that included 1778 participants found that subclavian stenosis predicted total and cardiovascular disease mortality independent of both cardiovascular risk factors and existent cardiovascular disease at baseline [9]. In another study, the prevalence of subclavian artery stenosis in patients undergoing myocardial revascularization was reported in the 0.5 to 1.0 percent range [16].Thus, the detection of upper extremity peripheral artery disease identifies patients at increased risk for stroke and cardiovascular disease and who may benefit from secondary prevention measures such as the following:●Control of hypertension●Lipid modification●Glycemic control in diabetes●Smoking cessation●Therapeutic lifestyle changes●Antithrombotic therapyRisk factor modification and secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease and stroke are discussed in detail separately. (See "Secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease" and "Management of claudication", section on 'Risk modification' and "Overview of secondary prevention of ischemic stroke".)Patients who do not have symptoms do not require intervention. Options for the treatment of symptomatic subclavian stenosis or occlusion include surgical revascularization (eg, carotid-subclavian bypass, subclavian transposition) and percutaneous transluminal angioplasty and stenting. Percutaneous catheter-based treatment is less invasive and associated with lower complication rates, and shorter hospitalization. The treatment of symptoms of subclavian steal syndrome is discussed in detail elsewhere. (See "Subclavian steal syndrome", section on 'Treatment'.)SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS●Although symptoms due to peripheral artery disease (PAD) are more common in the lower extremities, upper-extremity exercise-induced pain, pain at rest, and even tissue loss may also manifest in the upper extremities. (See 'Introduction' above.)●The subclavian arteries provide blood flow to the upper extremities. On the left, the subclavian artery originates directly from the aorta distal to the left common carotid artery. On the right, blood flows first through the innominate artery, which divides into the right common carotid artery and right subclavian artery. The collateral circulation around the shoulder is usually sufficient such that flow around a focal area of stenosis in the subclavian artery is well tolerated. (See 'Upper extremity arterial anatomy' above.)●Most patients with upper extremity peripheral artery disease have few to no symptoms and manifest only with a difference in the systolic blood pressure between one arm and the other. However, stenosis or occlusion of the upper extremity arteries can lead to symptoms of arm pain with exertion, evidence of distal thromboembolism, acute limb ischemia or chronic ischemic symptoms (ischemic rest pain, digit ulceration). Patients who develop dizziness, or even syncope, during arm exertion and retrograde blood flow in the vertebral artery have "subclavian steal syndrome." (See 'Presentation' above.)●Atherosclerosis is the most common cause of ischemic upper extremity disease (table 1), but other causes of upper extremity ischemia include small artery diseases (eg, vasculitis, disorders related to vasoconstriction) and large artery diseases such as arterial injury, arterial dissection, thrombosed aneurysm, atheroembolism, thromboembolism, fibrodysplasia, arteritis (eg, Takayasu disease, giant cell arteritis), and repetitive arterial injury. (See 'Diagnosis' above.)●Upper extremity peripheral artery disease is often associated with atherosclerosis involving other large vessels, particularly the carotid, coronary and lower extremity arteries. Thus, similar to the identification of lower extremity peripheral artery disease, the detection of upper extremity peripheral artery disease identifies patients at increased risk for stroke and cardiovascular disease and who may benefit from secondary prevention measures such as control of smoking cessation, control of hypertension, lipid modification, control of blood sugar and antithrombotic therapy. (See 'Management' above.)
		
