
			INTRODUCTION — The majority of primary cancers arising in the colon are adenocarcinomas. A surgical resection is the only curative treatment modality for localized colon cancer. Surgical resection may also be indicated in selected patients with limited potentially resectable metastatic disease in the liver and/or lung. The goal of surgical resection of primary colon cancer is complete removal of the tumor, the major vascular pedicles, and the lymphatic drainage basin of the affected colonic segment. En bloc resection of contiguous structures is indicated if there is attachment or infiltration of the tumor into a potentially resectable organ or structure. Patients with symptoms of complicated disease (eg, obstruction, perforation) may require a staged approach to resection. (See "Management of potentially resectable colorectal cancer liver metastases", section on 'Timing of hepatectomy in patients presenting with metastases'.)The surgical management of the primary in patients with localized colon cancer is reviewed here. The epidemiology, clinical presentation, staging, and medical therapies used to treat colon cancer (eg, chemotherapy, radiation therapy), surgical treatment of metastatic disease, issues surrounding resection of the primary site in patients who present with metastatic disease, and prognosis following treatment of localized colon cancer are reviewed separately. (See "Colorectal cancer: Epidemiology, risk factors, and protective factors" and "Clinical presentation, diagnosis, and staging of colorectal cancer" and "Overview of the management of primary colon cancer" and "Management of potentially resectable colorectal cancer liver metastases" and "Surgical resection of pulmonary metastases: Benefits; indications; preoperative evaluation and techniques" and "Locoregional methods for management and palliation in patients who present with stage IV colorectal cancer", section on 'Management of the primary cancer in patients presenting with synchronous metastases'.)Colon resection techniques are discussed elsewhere. (See "Overview of colon resection" and "Right and extended right colectomy: Open technique" and "Left colectomy: Open technique".)PREOPERATIVE STAGING — For many patients, the diagnosis of colon cancer is made based upon endoscopic biopsy of a polyp. For others, the diagnosis is made because of symptoms such as occult gastrointestinal bleeding or abdominal pain. In the United States and elsewhere, the standard practice at most institutions is that all patients with stage II, III, or IV colon cancer undergo staging CT scans of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis either prior to or following resection. In general, it is preferable to obtain radiographic staging studies preoperatively, as the scan results will occasionally change surgical planning. The TNM staging classification for colon cancer is given in the table (table 1). (See "Clinical presentation, diagnosis, and staging of colorectal cancer", section on 'Clinical presentation' and "Clinical presentation, diagnosis, and staging of colorectal cancer", section on 'Clinical staging evaluation'.)Most patients with complicated colon cancer that requires emergency surgery (perforation, obstruction) will have undergone abdominal CT of at least the abdomen and pelvis as part of their work-up. Under these circumstances, there is no need for other work-up such as CT of the chest. If a colonoscopy has not been done, ideally it should be performed; however, the timing depends on the situation. Once the emergent situation has been resolved, the remainder of the work-up can be completed. (See 'Complicated disease' below.)CANDIDATES FOR RESECTION — Surgical resection is the only curative treatment modality for localized colon cancer, and it may also be indicated for selected patients with limited potentially resectable metastatic disease in the liver and/or lung. (See "Management of potentially resectable colorectal cancer liver metastases" and "Surgical resection of pulmonary metastases: Benefits; indications; preoperative evaluation and techniques".)Contraindications — Patients with unresectable metastatic disease are generally not candidates for resection of the primary colon tumor in the absence of symptoms or complications (eg, perforation, obstruction) attributable to the primary tumor. (See 'Synchronous metastatic disease' below and 'Complicated disease' below and 'Palliative surgery' below.)Increasing age may be accompanied by higher rates of medical comorbidity. Some patients may not be appropriate candidates for resection due to medical comorbidities. (See "Overview of colon resection", section on 'Medical risk assessment'.) GENERAL PRINCIPLES — The goal of surgical resection of primary colon cancer is complete removal of the tumor, the major vascular pedicles, and the lymphatic drainage basin of the affected colonic segment. These goals can be achieved using an open or laparoscopic approach, but the specific clinical situation (eg, elective versus emergent colectomy) often dictates the approach.Open versus laparoscopic colectomy — Metaanalyses of randomized trials (the largest trial and two of the meta-analyses are described below) demonstrate faster recovery with no detrimental impact on recurrence or survival for laparoscopic compared with open colectomy for the treatment of colon cancer. Thus, when a surgeon experienced with advanced laparoscopic colectomy techniques is available, we suggest laparoscopic-assisted colectomy rather than open colectomy for patients with uncomplicated localized colon cancers who have not had prior extensive abdominal surgery [1-10]. At the time of endoscopy, a tattoo should be placed in the area of the tumor so that it can be reliably identified at the time of laparoscopic colectomy. For complicated colon cancers, an open approach is frequently necessary. ●In the largest trial, the United States Intergroup Clinical Outcomes of Surgical Therapy (COST) trial, 872 patients with colonic adenocarcinoma were randomly assigned to open or laparoscopic colectomy by credentialed surgeons, who each performed at least 20 laparoscopic resections and underwent videotape analysis of their technique before enrolling patients in the study [5,6].Operative time was significantly longer in the laparoscopic group (150 versus 95 minutes), and 21 percent of laparoscopic cases required conversion to an open procedure [5]. On the other hand, the laparoscopic group had modestly but significantly shorter durations of hospital stay (five versus six days) and parenteral analgesic use (three versus four days). There were no significant differences in intraoperative or postoperative complications, perioperative mortality rates, readmission or reoperation rates [5], or rates of surgical wound recurrence [6]. At a median follow-up of seven years, there were no significant differences in the five-year disease-free survival (69 versus 68 percent in the laparoscopic and open colectomy groups, respectively) or overall survival (76 versus 75 percent). ●Long-term outcomes from laparoscopic versus open colon resection have been addressed in two meta-analyses of randomized trials, most of which enrolled exclusively or predominantly patients with colon cancer [1,2]. One analyzed results from seven published randomized trials, while the other focused on four trials with the end-point of survival that enrolled more than 150 patients [4-7,11].Both concluded that laparoscopic colectomy provides oncologic outcomes that are comparable to those achieved with an open approach with respect to cause-specific survival, disease recurrence, and number of lymph nodes harvested. Of the seven trials reporting this outcome, only 3 of 826 patients randomized to laparoscopic surgery developed an incisional recurrence, compared with 1 of 801 patients undergoing open surgery [2].The surgeon must have a low threshold for converting from a laparoscopic to open approach when indicated. The reported conversion rate in the trials discussed above varied from 11 to 21 percent. Conversion rates are lower with greater surgeon experience [4,5,7,11].The same principles of resection that apply to open surgery for resectable colon cancer apply to the laparoscopic approach. Techniques for laparoscopic resection are reviewed separately. (See "Overview of colon resection", section on 'Open versus laparoscopic colectomy'.)Resection margins — Proximal and distal resection margins should be at least 5 cm from the tumor [12]. These margins should allow for an adequate resection of the appropriate segment of the bowel with its vascular supply and associated lymphatics. For patients undergoing right hemicolectomy, the length of ileum resected does not influence local recurrence rates [12]. (See 'Cecum or right colon' below.) Regional lymphadenectomy — Complete mesocolic excision and central vascular ligation is the en bloc removal of the tumor bearing colon and associated mesentery with an intact investing envelope and no defects in the mesentery. High ligation of the mesenteric vessels is an integral part of complete mesocolic excision.Such a resection will include the regional mesenteric lymph nodes, which include those nodes along the course of major mesenteric vessels and the vascular arcades of the marginal artery (figure 1), as well as those adjacent to the colon along its mesocolic border, as given in the table (table 2) [13]. Regional lymphadenectomy provides prognostic information and guides postoperative management, such as chemotherapy administration. There is a direct correlation between the number of lymph nodes evaluated per patient after surgical resection and survival [14]. In addition, the consensus guidelines recommend that at least 12 lymph nodes be assessed for adequate staging [12,15-17]. The American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) encourages the use of adjuvant chemotherapy for patients with node-negative colon cancer if there are fewer than 12 nodes in the surgical specimen [18]. (See "Adjuvant chemotherapy for resected stage II colon cancer", section on 'Summary'.)Clinical, pathological, and molecular variables contribute to the total number of lymph nodes recovered for patients with colorectal cancer, independent of surgical resection technique and pathologist counting (operator-independent variables). In a review of two prospective cohort databases that included 918 patients undergoing a colorectal cancer resection, there was a 1.09-fold increase (95% CI 1.05-1.13) in total number of lymph nodes recovered per each 10 cm increase in specimen length [19]. In addition, for every 5 cm increase in tumor size, there was a 1.29-fold increase (1.14-1.46) in total lymph node count. Cancers located in the ascending colon, colorectal cancers with a KRAS mutation (Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog), and node negative specimens were associated with the greatest number of total lymph nodes recovered. Further evaluation of the relationship between KRAS mutations and total node count is warranted. (See "Molecular genetics of colorectal cancer", section on 'Ras'.)Role of sentinel node mapping — The sentinel lymph node (SLN) concept is based upon the observation that tumor cells migrating from a primary tumor metastasize to one or a few lymph nodes (LNs) before involving other LNs. Injection of vital blue dye and/or radiolabeled colloid around the area of the tumor permits identification of a SLN in the majority of patients, and its status accurately predicts the status of the remaining regional LNs. The concept of SLN biopsy as a less morbid alternative to complete regional lymph node dissection has gained traction in patients with breast cancer and melanoma, but its utility for other tumor types has yet to be demonstrated. (See "Sentinel lymph node dissection for breast cancer: Indications and outcomes" and "Evaluation and treatment of regional lymph nodes in melanoma", section on 'Sentinel lymph node biopsy'.) The contribution of SLN mapping in colon cancer has been addressed in both prospective and retrospective studies:●Upstaging is reported in 11 to 29 percent of patients with otherwise node-negative colon cancer (by standard hematoxylin & eosin [H&E] staining) when the LNs retrieved by SLN mapping are studied by immunohistochemistry and/or molecular techniques [20-22]. However, there is uncertainty surrounding the prognostic significance of these micrometastases; the 2010 TNM staging designates isolated tumor cell nodal micrometastases as pN0 disease (table 1), whether detected by standard histologic techniques, immunohistochemistry, or by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) [13]. (See "Pathology and prognostic determinants of colorectal cancer", section on 'Nodal micrometastases'.)●Furthermore, not all investigators report success with SLN mapping in colon cancer [23]. In single-institution and multi-institution studies, multilevel sectioning of SLNs failed to predict the presence of nodal disease (as determined by the status of nonsentinel nodes in the resection specimen) in a significant number of patients, particularly those with stage T3/4 disease (table 1) [20,24-27]. The false-negative rate in one study was 46 percent [20]. These data suggest that SLN mapping by itself may not improve the accuracy of nodal staging in colon cancer.Until further information is available, SLN mapping should not be considered a standard approach to nodal staging in colon cancer. Role of oophorectomy — Isolated ovarian metastases occur in approximately 1 percent of women with colon cancer, both at the time of colorectal cancer diagnosis and as a site of metachronous disease spread [28]. While it is generally acknowledged that ovarian metastases (particularly if synchronous and bilateral) represent a poor prognostic factor, complete resection of isolated ovarian metastases may improve survival. Resection of clinically apparent ovarian metastases is discussed elsewhere. (See "Locoregional methods for management and palliation in patients who present with stage IV colorectal cancer", section on 'Ovarian metastases'.) Prophylactic oophorectomy for normal appearing ovaries during a primary colon cancer resection is not recommended as there are no data that support a survival advantage for the procedure.  COLON RESECTION — Segmental resection alone may be sufficient for primary tumor removal; however, a wider resection may be required to perform a regional lymphadenectomy, which requires division of the major blood vessels at their origin to maximize the number of lymph nodes removed. (See 'Regional lymphadenectomy' above.)  Carcinoma in a polyp — The majority of colorectal cancers arise from polyps (adenomas). The malignant potential of an adenoma depends on its size, histology, and degree of dysplasia. It is believed that the transformation from normal mucosa to adenoma, dysplasia, in situ (noninvasive) cancer, and then to invasive cancer takes many years. An invasive cancer, which is defined by penetration of the muscularis mucosa by malignant cells, has the potential to metastasize to lymph nodes and distant sites. The management of a malignant polyp containing invasive carcinoma must be individualized. Certain characteristics (poorly differentiated histology, lymphovascular invasion, cancer at the resection or stalk margin, invasion into the muscularis propria [T2 lesion], sessile polyp with lower third submucosal penetration) are considered unfavorable, as they are associated with an increased incidence of residual cancer and/or lymphatic spread. As such, their presence indicates the need for radical resection. These are discussed elsewhere. (See "Overview of the management of primary colon cancer", section on 'Management of carcinoma in a polyp'.)If invasive cancer is suspected at the time of polypectomy, the endoscopist usually tattoos the area by injecting a permanent surgical marker at the site of the polypectomy. In this manner, the site can be localized during surgical exploration. If the area was not tattoed at the time of polypectomy, an attempt at finding the polypectomy site and tattoing should be performed prior to surgery. (See "Tattooing and other methods for localizing colonic lesions".)Localized — The extent of resection for malignant colon resection differs from that of benign lesions. (See "Overview of colon resection", section on 'Benign versus malignant disease'.)Cecum or right colon — A right hemicolectomy is usually performed for cancer of the cecum and ascending colon, and for some hepatic flexure cancers (figure 2). The general principles for performing the operative procedure are described elsewhere. (See "Overview of colon resection" and "Right and extended right colectomy: Open technique".)Transverse colon — Transverse colectomy is a procedure that is uncommonly performed, as cancers are generally either to the right or left of the midline, and therefore, hemicolectomy (extended right or left) should be performed to achieve an adequate lymphadenectomy. An extended right colectomy is typically performed for cancer of the hepatic flexure and proximal transverse colon (figure 3) [29]. The general principles for performing the operative procedure are described elsewhere. (See "Overview of colon resection" and "Right and extended right colectomy: Open technique".)In the case of “true” midtransverse cancers, a transverse colectomy can be performed. A transverse colectomy may be undertaken for midtransverse colon cancers as long as satisfactory resection margins and an adequate lymphadenectomy can be obtained (figure 4). The transverse colon is resected along with the middle colic vessels and its mesentery (figure 5 and figure 1). However, the surgeon must be cognizant that an adequate lymphadenectomy is being performed and that there will be no tension at the anastomosis. If any of these factors are not met, the patient is best served by an extended right or left hemicolectomy.Left colon — A left hemicolectomy is appropriate for tumors in the distal transverse or descending colon and for selected patients with proximal sigmoid colon cancer (figure 6 and figure 7). In select patients, a segmental colectomy may be performed as long as adequate resection margins and lymphadenectomy are achieved. The general principles for performing the operative procedure are described elsewhere. (See "Left colectomy: Open technique".)Sigmoid colon — For sigmoid colon cancers, sigmoid colectomy is appropriate. The inferior mesenteric artery is divided at its origin, and dissection proceeds just under the superior rectal vessels toward the pelvis until adequate margins are obtained. Synchronous colon cancer — A subtotal or a total abdominal colectomy is indicated if there are synchronous neoplasms on the right and left sides of the colon. For patients with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) who present with a colon cancer, total abdominal colectomy is the procedure of choice. It is also a procedure that can be used in selected patients with Familial Adenomatous Polyposis and MUTYH-associated polyposis. (See "Lynch syndrome (hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer): Clinical manifestations and diagnosis" and "Familial adenomatous polyposis and MUTYH associated polyposis: Screening and management of patients and families", section on 'Management'.)Locally advanced cancer — Approximately 10 percent of patients with colon cancer have invasion of contiguous organs or inflammatory adhesions involving neighboring structures. En bloc resection of contiguous structures is indicated if there is attachment or infiltration of the tumor into any organ or structure. Guidelines from the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN), National Cancer Institute (NCI), the American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons, as well as quality performance indicators for colorectal cancer surgery developed by an independent group, emphasize that appropriate surgical management for colon cancers that grow through the bowel wall into adjacent structures or organs (eg, T4 disease) (table 1) should include multivisceral resection with a negative margin of the adjacent structure [12,16,17].Multivisceral resection is associated with improved local control and overall survival [30-35]. In some series, long-term outcomes are comparable to those of patients undergoing standard resection who do not have adjacent organ adhesions [31,33], although perioperative morbidity rates may be higher [31]. The plane of adherence between the colonic tumor and the adjacent organ(s) should not be disrupted because over 40 percent of these adhesions are malignant [36] and transection of tumor could further impair prognosis.Despite the benefits of multivisceral en bloc resection for locally advanced disease, this approach is underutilized [35]. In a study derived from the SEER database, only one-third of patients with locally advanced colorectal cancer treated between 1988 and 2002 were managed by multivisceral en bloc resection [35]. These data underscore the need for further education and training of surgeons as well as better preoperative staging and surgical planning, as these patients often need a multidisciplinary approach.If the surgeon anticipates the need for postoperative radiation therapy, consideration should be given to placing surgical clips at the resected tumor bed margins to better direct therapy. Occasionally, if omentum is available, an omental flap could be utilized to try to exclude small bowel from the radiation field. (See "Overview of the management of primary colon cancer", section on 'Benefit of postoperative RT'.)Synchronous metastatic disease — Initial management of the primary site in patients who present with stage IV disease is individualized. In general, the choice and sequence of treatment is guided by the presence or absence of symptoms or complications related to the primary tumor, and whether or not the metastatic lesions are potentially resectable. ●For patients with potentially resectable metastases in liver or lung, an aggressive surgical approach is warranted for both the primary and metastatic sites, provided the metastases are potentially resectable for cure. (See "Locoregional methods for management and palliation in patients who present with stage IV colorectal cancer", section on 'Management of the primary cancer in patients presenting with synchronous metastases' and "Management of potentially resectable colorectal cancer liver metastases" and "Surgical resection of pulmonary metastases: Benefits; indications; preoperative evaluation and techniques" and "Surgical resection of pulmonary metastases: Outcomes by histology", section on 'Colorectal cancer'.)●In the setting of unresectable metastatic disease, patients with symptoms or complications relative to the primary site are managed according to their severity, and the medical condition of the patient. (See 'Palliative surgery' below and 'Complicated disease' below.)●Whether to resect the primary tumor in asymptomatic patients who have unresectable metastatic disease is controversial. Given the relatively low risk of bleeding (3 percent) or obstruction/perforation (7 to 14 percent) in patients with stage IV disease initially managed conservatively [37-41], and relatively high rates of perioperative morbidity [39], we agree with guidelines from the National Comprehensive Cancer Network that suggest not performing colon resection unless there is imminent risk of developing significant complications. (See "Locoregional methods for management and palliation in patients who present with stage IV colorectal cancer", section on 'Asymptomatic'.)COMPLICATED DISEASE — For patients with complications related to the primary tumor (eg, obstruction, perforation), the decision to proceed with surgery needs to be individualized depending on the presenting symptoms and signs as well as the medical condition of the patient. Patients with perforated tumor and generalized peritonitis need urgent surgery; however, depending upon the clinical scenario, hemodynamically stable patients with a localized abscess, bowel obstruction, or mild to moderate gastrointestinal bleeding benefit from staging evaluation to determine the choice and sequence of treatment. ●For patients without metastatic disease, curative resection is the goal, using either a one-stage or two-stage approach. (See 'Colonic perforation' below and 'Colonic obstruction' below.) ●For patients who have synchronous metastatic disease, systemic chemotherapy or resection of the metastatic lesions may be options. The goal of treatment is to manage the immediate complications, which may involve tumor resection, but can include nonsurgical options (eg, stenting to relieve obstruction, angioembolization for bleeding). (See "Systemic chemotherapy for metastatic colorectal cancer: General principles" and "Systemic chemotherapy for nonoperable metastatic colorectal cancer: Treatment recommendations" and "Locoregional methods for management and palliation in patients who present with stage IV colorectal cancer", section on 'Management of the primary cancer in patients presenting with synchronous metastases' and 'Palliative surgery' below.)●Patients with unresectable metastases are managed to palliate their symptoms. (See 'Palliation of advanced disease' below.)Colonic perforation — Treatment options in patients with tumor perforation depend upon the patient's overall condition and whether peritonitis is localized or generalized. If the patient is stable and peritonitis is not generalized, tumor resection with a primary anastomosis can be performed in those who are appropriate surgical candidates. Primary anastomosis is not performed in the clinical setting of diffuse peritonitis or free perforation, and/or if the patient is medically unstable.For patients with a localized fluid collection or abscess, percutaneous drainage can be performed. However, if transabdominal drainage is performed, there is a potential for seeding of the drain tract, and therefore, at the time of definitive resection, the drain tract and rim of the abdominal wall will need to be resected. Similarly, perforation may cause the tumor to adhere to other organs and an en bloc resection may be necessary. Colonic obstruction — Optimal management of an obstructing colon cancer depends upon the condition of the patient and the tumor location. For surgical candidates, options include resection of the tumor with a primary anastomosis with or without a temporary proximal diversion, resection without an anastomosis and with an end colostomy, and proximal diversion with a mucous fistula or a loop colostomy to temporize the situation, followed by elective definitive resection at a second operation.In general, the preferred method of treatment is resection of the obstructing lesion and primary anastomosis with or without proximal diversion, but the choice of procedures depends on the location of the tumor and other factors. For patients with obstructing right-sided cancers, right colectomy or extended right colectomy and primary ileocolonic anastomosis without proximal diversion can be safely performed since the right and transverse colon have low bacterial counts. Some studies suggest that obstructing left-sided lesions can also be safely managed with a one-stage procedure with acceptable morbidity [42,43]. As an example, in a retrospective study of 243 consecutive patients who underwent emergent surgery for obstructing colon cancer at Queen Mary's Hospital in Hong Kong, there were no statistically significant differences in hospital mortality or anastomotic leak rates among patients who underwent resection and primary anastomosis regardless of tumor location (right- versus left-sided) [42]. Nevertheless, many surgeons routinely perform a temporary proximal diverting colostomy following resection of an obstructing left-sided colon cancer. For patients who are not good candidates for surgery, a temporizing approach for an obstructing cancer is endoscopic placement of an expandable metal stent. Enteral stenting in the setting of an obstruction from cancer is reviewed separately. (See "Enteral stents for the management of malignant colorectal obstruction".)Timing of ostomy closure — Although restoration of bowel continuity by means of a tension-free primary anastomosis is the goal for patients undergoing colectomy, patients with complicated disease may require colostomy. (See 'Colonic perforation' above and 'Colonic obstruction' above.)If an ostomy was performed at the time of primary colon surgery, the timing of stoma closure depends on various factors. Most importantly, resolution and recovery from the events that led to the decision to create the stoma (eg, perforation, generalized peritonitis, obstruction, and cardiovascular instability) must have taken place. If adjuvant chemotherapy is being administered, closure should be delayed to avoid unnecessary treatment delays. If a primary anastomosis was performed, it should be studied for integrity and patency prior to closure of the stoma. If the entire colon was not evaluated prior to the stoma formation due to the emergent situation or due to an obstructing tumor, colonoscopy is indicated prior to ostomy closure. (See "Management of patients with a colostomy or ileostomy", section on 'Closure of a temporary colostomy' and "Surgical principles of ostomy construction".)PALLIATION OF ADVANCED DISEASE — For symptomatic patients with advanced unresectable metastatic disease, limited surgery to manage complications is an option in good risk surgical candidates. If the patient is not a surgical candidate because of comorbidities, high operative risk(s), decreased life expectancy, or refusal of surgery, nonsurgical options (eg, stenting) can be considered. (See "Locoregional methods for management and palliation in patients who present with stage IV colorectal cancer", section on 'Nonsurgical palliative options'.)Palliative surgery — The methods for surgical palliation for patients with symptomatic colon or rectal cancer with incurable metastatic disease include: ●Resection of cancer and primary anastomosis●Diverting end colostomy with mucous fistula●Bypass procedureFor patients who can tolerate an intraabdominal procedure, the optimal palliative procedure is a resection with a primary anastomosis. However, resection or primary anastomosis may not be possible in all clinical settings because of extensive local disease involving adjacent structures, or serious comorbid illnesses. In these situations, a diverting end colostomy with creation of a mucous fistula is the procedure of choice, especially in patients with distal colonic tumors. The mucous fistula decompresses the secretions from the distally obstructed segment of bowel. An end colostomy rather than a loop colostomy is preferred because it is easier to manage with fewer complications. (See "Surgical principles of ostomy construction", section on 'Incidence of stomal complications' and "Management of patients with a colostomy or ileostomy".)For patients with unresectable obstructing cancers, a bypass between the small bowel and the colon distal to the obstruction can be performed. However, if the patient has a competent ileocecal valve, there is potential for distention of the bypassed segment and eventual closed loop obstruction due to the accumulation of secretions in the bypassed colon. In these cases, the cecum can be tacked to the abdominal wall with seromuscular sutures, and surgical clips can be placed in the abdominal wall to mark the area where a potential percutaneous drain can be placed at a later time if necessary.Regardless of the method of surgical palliation, the laparoscopic approach to colorectal resection is preferred to minimize the risk of postoperative complications. While there are no data from randomized trials or prospective studies regarding the optimal approach (open versus laparoscopic) for surgical palliation, we believe the data from trials of colectomy for colon resection for colorectal cancer in the nonpalliative setting are directly applicable. Randomized trials in that setting have shown equivalent cancer outcomes and lower morbidity with the laparoscopic approach. Additionally, the data from a retrospective review in the palliative setting are consistent with the general technical outcomes for laparoscopic colectomies. In 904 patients with stage IV colorectal cancer, patients undergoing laparoscopic resection (n = 226) had significantly fewer postoperative complications when compared with those undergoing open resection (17 versus 24 percent) [44]. Patients undergoing laparoscopic resection also had a shorter length of stay (14 versus 17 days), but a similar median survival (25.9 versus 22.3 months). However, there was a 12 percent conversion rate from a laparoscopic to an open approach due to unanticipated tumor bulk or invasion into adjacent structures. (See 'Open versus laparoscopic colectomy' above.)LOCOREGIONAL RECURRENCE — Isolated local and regional recurrences occur in approximately 3 to 12 percent of patients who have undergone a primary colon cancer resection with curative intent [45-47]. Curative intent is defined as histologically negative margins of resection and no evidence of synchronous unresectable distant disease. Locoregional recurrences are classified into four categories: anastomotic, mesenteric/nodal, retroperitoneal, and peritoneal [48]. Factors associated with recurrence include bowel perforation, fistulization, T3 and T4 size lesions (table 1), emergent surgery, poorly differentiated tumors, and cancers located in the hepatic flexure or sigmoid colon [45,46]. A subset of patients with isolated recurrent locoregional colon cancer will derive long-term benefit from aggressive surgical resection of the recurrent disease. Patients suspected of having a locoregional recurrence should undergo comprehensive restaging, including a CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, and a colonoscopy. Because of its greater sensitivity for distant metastatic disease, a PET scan is indicated if staging CT scans are negative [49]. (See "Clinical presentation, diagnosis, and staging of colorectal cancer", section on 'PET scans'.)Patients with an isolated locoregional recurrence should be evaluated for a salvage resection. The most important prognostic factor is the ability to achieve an R0 resection (microscopic negative margins). In two prospective studies, five-year survival for patients who were able to undergo R0 resection was 43 and 57 percent, respectively, versus <5 percent for those with an incomplete or no resection [46,48]. Surgical management of patients with concurrent local recurrence and metastatic disease (eg, liver) should be based upon resectability of both sites and patient symptoms. Systemic therapy and management of metastatic colon cancer is reviewed elsewhere. (See "Management of potentially resectable colorectal cancer liver metastases", section on 'Systemic chemotherapy' and "Systemic chemotherapy for nonoperable metastatic colorectal cancer: Treatment recommendations" and "Systemic chemotherapy for metastatic colorectal cancer: Completed clinical trials".)Although there are no prospective trials to guide therapy, the management of these patients is typically multidisciplinary and may include chemotherapy, chemoradiotherapy, or intraoperative radiation therapy, in addition to surgery.  (See "Management of potentially resectable colorectal cancer liver metastases", section on 'Systemic chemotherapy'.)INFORMATION FOR PATIENTS — UpToDate offers two types of patient education materials, “The Basics” and “Beyond the Basics.” The Basics patient education pieces are written in plain language, at the 5th to 6th grade reading level, and they answer the four or five key questions a patient might have about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who want a general overview and who prefer short, easy-to-read materials. Beyond the Basics patient education pieces are longer, more sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are written at the 10th to 12th grade reading level and are best for patients who want in-depth information and are comfortable with some medical jargon.Here are the patient education articles that are relevant to this topic. We encourage you to print or e-mail these topics to your patients. (You can also locate patient education articles on a variety of subjects by searching on “patient info” and the keyword(s) of interest.) ●Basics topics (see "Patient information: Colon and rectal cancer (The Basics)" and "Patient information: Colectomy (The Basics)")●Beyond the Basics topics (see "Patient information: Colon and rectal cancer (Beyond the Basics)" and "Patient information: Colorectal cancer treatment; metastatic cancer (Beyond the Basics)")SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS●The majority of primary cancers arising in the colon are adenocarcinomas. A surgical resection is the only curative treatment modality for localized colon cancer. The goal of surgical resection is complete removal of the tumor, the major vascular pedicles, and the lymphatic drainage basin of the affected colonic segment. (See 'Introduction' above.)●We suggest laparoscopic-assisted colectomy rather than open colectomy for patients with uncomplicated localized colon cancers who have not had prior extensive abdominal surgery (Grade 2A). In experienced hands, appropriately selected patients have comparable oncologic outcomes, perioperative morbidity and mortality, and faster recovery with laparoscopic as compared with open surgery. (See 'Open versus laparoscopic colectomy' above.) ●Regardless of whether a laparoscopic or open colectomy is performed, the surgical specimen should contain at least 12 lymph nodes. Fewer nodes should prompt consideration of adjuvant chemotherapy, even if the patient has stage II (lymph node-negative) disease (table 1). Sentinel lymph node mapping is not sufficiently accurate to replace regional lymphadenectomy. (See 'Regional lymphadenectomy' above and 'Role of sentinel node mapping' above.)●For patients with locally advanced (eg, T4) (table 1) tumors that involve contiguous organs or structures, we suggest an en bloc multivisceral resection as needed to obtain negative resection margins of the involved structure (Grade 2C). (See "Overview of the management of primary colon cancer", section on 'Locally advanced primary lesions'.)●We recommend not performing a prophylactic bilateral oophorectomy in women with potentially resectable colon or rectal cancer and normal-appearing ovaries (Grade 1B). (See 'Open versus laparoscopic colectomy' above.)●The management of complicated colon cancers depends upon the condition of the patient, the tumor location, and for patients who can be staged, whether metastatic disease is potentially resectable.•For patients with potentially resectable metastases in the liver or lung, an aggressive surgical approach is warranted for both the primary and metastatic sites, provided the metastases are potentially resectable for cure. (See 'Synchronous metastatic disease' above.) •For symptomatic patients with metastatic disease who are not candidates for potentially curative resection, other options for management of obstructing primary tumor include surgical bypass, diverting colostomy and mucous fistula or loop colostomy, placement of an intraluminal self-expanding metal stent, or for nonobstructing tumors, laser ablation. (See "Locoregional methods for management and palliation in patients who present with stage IV colorectal cancer", section on 'Methods for surgical palliation'.)•Right-sided tumors can usually be managed with resection and a primary anastomosis without a proximal diversion. The preferred treatment for obstructing left-sided tumors is resection and primary anastomosis, with or without temporary proximal diversion of the fecal stream, if the patient can tolerate it. Stenting may permit elective, rather than urgent, surgical intervention. (See 'Colonic obstruction' above.)•Management of perforated tumors must be individualized, depending on the condition of the patient and whether peritonitis is localized or generalized. We recommend not performing a primary anastomosis if there is diffuse peritonitis, free perforation, or if the patient is medically unstable (Grade 1B). For these cases, temporizing options include percutaneous drainage alone, or a temporary diverting colostomy with a planned later elective resection. (See 'Colonic perforation' above.)
		
