
			INTRODUCTION — The cardiovascular physical examination includes inspection, palpation, and auscultation of the heart as well as examination of the arterial and venous pulses. (See "Examination of the precordial pulsation" and "Examination of the arterial pulse" and "Examination of the jugular venous pulse".) The genesis of heart sounds continues to be a subject of debate and the precise mechanisms of their production have not been identified with certainty. This topic will review the auscultation of heart sounds. The auscultation of cardiac murmurs is discussed separately. (See "Auscultation of cardiac murmurs".)STETHOSCOPES — A variety of stethoscopes are available for auscultation of heart sounds. Many stethoscopes have a separate bell and diaphragm. The bell is most effective at transmitting lower frequency sounds, while the diaphragm is most effective at transmitting higher frequency sounds.Some stethoscopes combine these functions into a single surface such that the intensity of pressure of the stethoscope against the skin determines whether the stethoscope functions as a bell or a diaphragm. In addition, pressing the bell more firmly against the skin alters the frequencies that are loudest towards those of a diaphragm such that higher frequency sounds become louder and lower frequency sounds become softer.FIRST HEART SOUND (S1) — The classic hypothesis for the genesis of the first heart sound (S1), for which there is much support, relates the high-frequency components of S1 to mitral and tricuspid valve closure; the first component of S1 is attributed to mitral valve closure and the second to closure of the tricuspid valve [1-4]. A second hypothesis suggests that the principal high-frequency elements of S1 are related to movement and acceleration of blood in early systole, and are influenced by the peak rate of rise of left ventricular (LV) systolic pressure (dP/dt), which is a measure of contractility and ejection of blood into the root of the aorta [5].S1 occurs just before or coincident with the upstroke of the carotid pulse. Mitral valve closure precedes the upstroke of the carotid pulse because it occurs before LV ejection begins. However, the delay between mitral valve closure and the upstroke of the carotid pulse normally is too short to be appreciated at the bedside. Tricuspid valve closure normally coincides with the upstroke of the carotid pulse.S1 is best heard with the diaphragm of the stethoscope. The intensity of S1 is primarily determined by the intensity of mitral valve closure and is normally maximal over the cardiac apex. Several factors contribute to the S1 intensity (table 1) [6-8]:●Mitral valve position at the onset of systole●The rate of mitral valve closure●Mobility of the mitral valve●The PR interval●Strength of ventricular systoleSome of these factors, such as the rate of mitral valve closure and the strength of ventricular systole, are interrelated; more than one factor may contribute to altered S1 intensity.The intensity of S1 at the bedside is usually based upon a subjective impression. S1 normally is louder than second heart sound (S2) over the apex and along the lower left sternal border; intensity is reduced if S1 is softer than S2 over these areas. S1 intensity is likely to be accentuated if S1 is much louder than S2 over the left or right second interspace.Increased intensity of S1 — Mitral valve closure begins a few milliseconds before onset of the rise of the LV pressure pulse. The intensity of valve closure is increased when the mitral valve remains widely open at end-diastole and then closes rapidly as occurs with an elevated peak rate of rise of LV systolic pressure (peak dP/dt). The greater distance of travel of the leaflets from the open to the closed position and the increased velocity of closure contribute to the increased intensity of S1. Clinical situations in which this occurs include (table 1):●Increased transvalvular gradient (mitral valve obstruction as in mitral stenosis or atrial myxoma).●Increased transvalvular flow (left-to-right shunt in patent ductus arteriosus, ventricular septal defect, and high output state).●Shortened diastole (tachycardia).●Short PR intervals (preexcitation syndrome).The relative contribution of the distance of travel and the velocity of mitral valve closure to increased S1 intensity is difficult to determine; both factors are likely to play a role. When mitral valve closure occurs on the steeper part of the LV pressure pulse, the intensity of S1 increases; this phenomenon may also contribute to an accentuated S1 observed in patients with extremely short PR intervals and left atrial myxoma [9].The increased intensity of tricuspid valve closure in atrial septal defect and tricuspid valve obstruction (tricuspid stenosis, right atrial myxoma) can also be explained by the same phenomenon. The tricuspid valve is held open by increased transvalvular flow and the transvalvular gradient until final closure with increased velocity occurs with right ventricular (RV) systole.Decreased intensity of S1 — Restricted valve mobility and lack of apposition of the valve leaflets decrease the intensity of S1. Thus, S1 is soft when the mitral valve is immobile due to calcification and fibrosis, despite a significant transvalvular gradient. S1 may also be reduced when the leaflets are semi-closed prior to the onset of systole or when the velocity of closure is reduced, as can occur with LV dysfunction. These situations are illustrated by the following examples (table 1):●S1 is very soft or absent when mitral regurgitation results from fibrosis and destruction of the valve leaflets (as in patients with rheumatic valve disease), which prevent effective mitral valve closure. In contrast, mitral regurgitation due to perforation of the valve leaflets from bacterial endocarditis may not be associated with a reduced intensity of S1. Similarly, S1 is normal or even accentuated in patients with mitral valve prolapse with late systolic regurgitation. Increased intensity of S1 in some patients with the mitral valve prolapse syndrome may be caused by an increased strength of ventricular systole (hyperkinetic) [10].●Reduced S1 intensity occurs when the mitral valve remains in the semi-closed position before the onset of ventricular systole and when the distance of travel and the velocity of valve closure are decreased. S1 is usually soft when the PR interval is prolonged (exceeding 0.2 second) since semi-closure of the mitral valve occurs following atrial systole and before ventricular systole begins. Premature closure of the mitral valve can occur in patients with severe acute aortic regurgitation due to a rapid rise in LV diastolic pressure; the mitral valve may be virtually closed at the onset of systole, resulting in a markedly decreased intensity of or even absent S1 [11].●S1 is soft in some patients with left bundle branch block without any other obvious abnormality; the mechanism is unclear. Decreased valve closure velocity due to myocardial dysfunction is possible.●Hemodynamically significant aortic stenosis may be associated with a soft S1; this can occur in the absence of spreading calcification to the mitral valve and in the presence of a normal PR interval [9]. Semi-closure of the mitral valve due to a powerful atrial contraction and an abnormally elevated LV diastolic pressure before the onset of ventricular systole is the most likely explanation.●S1 is frequently soft in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy, even in the absence of a prolonged PR interval or bundle branch block. The decreased S1 is almost invariably associated with a significantly reduced LV ejection fraction and elevated pulmonary capillary wedge pressure. The mechanism for a soft S1 in these patients remains unclear; semi-closure of the mitral valve due to an elevated LV diastolic pressure and decreased velocity of valve closure due to myocardial dysfunction may contribute.●Decreased conduction of sounds through the chest wall reduces the intensity of S1 in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, obesity, and pericardial effusion.Variation in the intensity of S1 — Varying intensity of S1 may be evident in the following situations:●It is a common feature of atrial fibrillation; the mechanism appears to be a variation in the velocity of valve closure related to changes in the RR cycle length.●The intensity of S1 varies in the presence of premature beats.●Changing intensity of S1 occurs in atrioventricular dissociation, whether the heart rate is slow or fast (eg, in complete heart block or ventricular tachycardia). The changing intensity is due to random variation of the PR interval; the short PR interval is associated with an increased intensity and the long PR interval with a decreased intensity. The pulse is regular in atrioventricular dissociation; thus, the varying intensity of S1 in a patient with a regular pulse almost always suggests atrioventricular dissociation.●Auscultatory alternans, in which S1 is soft and loud with alternate beats, is a rare finding in severe cardiac tamponade; it is almost always associated with electrical alternans and pulsus paradoxus. Although the pulse is regular, changes in the intensity of S1 occur regularly with the alternate beats and not randomly as in atrioventricular dissociation.Splitting of S1 — There are normally two components of S1: The mitral component precedes the carotid pulse upstroke and the tricuspid component occurs later. The interval between mitral and tricuspid closure is 0.02 to 0.03 second and can be appreciated with the diaphragm of the stethoscope along the lower left sternal border [1]. The mitral component is much louder than the tricuspid component and is normally heard more widely across the precordium; the tricuspid component is of low intensity and is best heard over the left third and fourth interspaces close to the sternal border.Abnormal splitting of S1 can result either from conduction disturbances, hemodynamic, or mechanical causes.Conduction abnormalities — A widely split S1 occurs in complete right bundle branch block, during LV pacing, with ectopic beats of LV origin, and in ventricular tachycardia and idioventricular rhythm when the QRS complex morphology is of right bundle branch block configuration. S2 is also widely split when wide splitting of S1 occurs due to conduction abnormalities, with a further increase in the splitting of S1 and S2 during inspiration; this is due to increased venous return and RV volume with further delay in tricuspid valve closure. A widely split S1 in conduction anomalies results from a delay in onset of the RV pressure pulse.Hemodynamic causes — Delayed closure of the tricuspid valve may occur in patients with atrial septal defect who have large left-to-right shunts. The widely split S1 in this case does not vary with inspiration since the RV volume is fixed despite the increased venous return.Wide splitting of S1 also occurs in patients with significant tricuspid stenosis due to a similar mechanism as in atrial septal defect. Wide splitting of S1 with increased intensity of the second component is a feature of Ebstein's anomaly [12]. It is related in part to the commonly associated right bundle branch block.In patients with right atrial myxoma, a delay in closure of the tricuspid valve also causes wide splitting of S1. Wide splitting of S1 resulting from hemodynamic causes may not be associated with wide splitting of S2 (except in atrial septal defect).Pseudo splitting of S1 — There are other cardiac sounds that may be confused with a split S1.●A relatively loud atrial sound (S4) preceding S1 may be confused with a split S1. (See 'Distinguishing from split S2 or S1' below.)●The combination of a systolic ejection sound (also a high-frequency sound) and S1 may appear as split S1. However, the S1 and ejection sound interval is usually greater than the normal mitral and tricuspid interval. Furthermore, an aortic ejection sound is heard over the cardiac apex, along the left sternal border, and over the right second interspace. In contrast, tricuspid closure is usually heard along the left lower sternal border. Thus, splitting of S1 is not heard over the right or left second interspace.Pulmonary ejection sounds can be easily distinguished from tricuspid closure. Pulmonary ejection sounds are usually localized and best heard over the left second interspace. More importantly, pulmonary ejection sounds decrease in intensity during inspiration, while the intensity of tricuspid closure remains unchanged or increases following inspiration.●A combination of S1 and a midsystolic click is rarely confused with a split S1 since the interval between them is usually far greater than that between mitral and tricuspid valve closure. Furthermore, the S1-click interval can be changed by maneuvers such as standing and squatting, while no significant changes in normal S1 splitting can be appreciated with these maneuvers.●The combination of a pacemaker sound and S1 should not be confused with the splitting of S1. The "pacemaker sound" that results from the stimulation of the intercostal muscles during pacing has a very high frequency and precedes S1; it therefore occurs well before the upstroke of the carotid pulse [13]. Furthermore, the pacemaker sound disappears with discontinuation of pacing.Reversed splitting of S1 — Reversed splitting of S1 (tricuspid component preceding the mitral component) is seldom recognized. It may occur in patients with severe mitral stenosis, in whom mitral valve closure is markedly delayed; in the presence of a left atrial myxoma since mitral valve closure occurs after the tumor is expelled from the LV to the left atrium, resulting in wide and reversed splitting of S1; and with premature beats arising from the RV and associated with a left bundle branch block pattern. In most patients with left bundle branch block, however, reversed splitting of S1 is not appreciated, suggesting that no significant delay in the onset of LV mechanical systole occurs.SECOND HEART SOUND (S2) — The genesis of the second heart sound (S2) consists of two components: aortic and pulmonary valve closure sounds, traditionally designated as A2 and P2 [1]. S2 occurs after the peak of the carotid pulse and coincides with its downslope. The onset of A2 occurs with the dicrotic notch of the aortic root pressure pulse [14,15].The two components of S2 are best heard with the diaphragm of the stethoscope and over the left second interspace close to the sternal border. A2 is widely transmitted to the right second interspace, along the left and right sternal border, and to the cardiac apex. P2 is normally best heard and recorded over the upper left sternal border and is poorly transmitted.Intensity of A2 and P2 — S2 is usually single during expiration, particularly when auscultation is performed with subjects in the semi-recumbent position. Separation of A2 and P2 occurs during inspiration, allowing comparison of the relative intensities of these two components. A2 is louder, even in pulmonary areas (left second interspace); it is the only component heard over the cardiac apex in almost all normal subjects [16]. P2 can be heard over the right second intercostal space and along the left sternal border. The relative intensity of A2 is almost always greater than P2 over the left second interspace; the intensity is equal in this area in approximately 2 percent of normal subjects.The major determinants of A2 intensity (and therefore the major determinant of S2) include (table 2):●Aortic pressure●Relative proximity of the aorta to the chest wall●Size of the aortic root●Degree of apposition of the valve leaflets and their mobilityIncreased intensity of A2 cannot be quantitated objectively by auscultation; it is based upon a subjective impression.The intensity of P2 is determined by:●Pulmonary arterial pressure, particularly the diastolic pressure●Size of the pulmonary artery●Degree of apposition of the pulmonary valve leafletsThe intensity of P2 is determined by comparing its intensity with A2. An increased P2 intensity is suggested when it is louder over the left second interspace or when there is transmission to the cardiac apex.Increased intensity of A2 — Increased intensity of A2 often occurs in systemic hypertension, coarctation of the aorta, and ascending aortic aneurysm; a "tambour" quality of A2 is commonly heard (table 2). The intensity of A2 is significantly increased when the aortic root is relatively anterior and closer to the anterior chest wall, as in tetralogy of Fallot and transposition of the great arteries.Increased intensity of P2 — The most common cause of an increased P2 intensity is pulmonary arterial hypertension of any etiology [17]. A2 is soft in patients with mitral regurgitation and P2 may appear to be increased. In these circumstances, one cannot rely on the relative intensity of P2 for the diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension.In atrial septal defect, the intensity of P2 is increased considerably and frequently greater than A2 over the left second interspace, even with a normal or slightly elevated pulmonary artery pressure [18]. P2 is heard over the cardiac apex in 50 percent of these patients. The mechanism for the increased intensity of P2, despite low pulmonary artery diastolic pressure and pulmonary vascular resistance, is unclear. A dilated pulmonary artery and considerable right ventricular (RV) dilatation may contribute.Decreased intensity of A2 — Decreased intensity of A2 occurs when there is lack of apposition of the valve leaflets, as in severe luetic aortic regurgitation. Other causes of decreased A2 intensity include lower arterial diastolic pressure (eg, in significant aortic regurgitation), a relatively immobile aortic valve due to calcification (eg, in patients with calcific aortic stenosis), and relatively lower arterial pressure in hemodynamically significant aortic stenosis (table 2).Decreased intensity of P2 — A decreased intensity of P2 occurs when there is lower pulmonary artery diastolic pressure, except with atrial septal defect. P2 is soft and delayed with significant RV outflow obstruction, as in patients with pulmonary valve stenosis. P2 is absent in patients with severe pulmonary insufficiency due to a congenitally absent pulmonary valve. In contrast, P2 is markedly accentuated in pulmonary insufficiency secondary to pulmonary hypertension.Splitting of S2 — Inspiratory splitting of S2 can be appreciated 24 to 48 hours after birth when the pulmonary vascular resistance is considerably lower than at birth. A2 and P2 are usually fused during the expiratory phase of continuous respiration when auscultation is performed in adults in the semi-recumbent position (30º to 40º from the horizontal); occasionally, slight expiratory splitting is heard in the recumbent position. During the inspiratory phase, separation of A2 and P2 occurs; the degree of splitting varies from 0.02 to 0.06 second [19]. Splitting of S2 is best heard with the diaphragm of the stethoscope over the left second interspace.Mechanism — Multiple mechanisms contribute to the normal inspiratory splitting of S2. A2, which is coincident with the incisura of the aortic pressure pulse, occurs on average 0.02 seconds after left ventricular (LV) systolic pressure falls below the aortic pressure. P2, coincident with the pulmonary arterial incisura, occurs 0.03 to 0.09 seconds after the crossover point of RV and central pulmonary arterial pressure [20,21].The interval between the pressure crossover point and the incisura (the onset of A2 or P2) has been termed “hangout time.” The hangout time is inversely proportional to the impedance to blood flow in the systemic arterial and pulmonary arterial systems. Systemic vascular resistance normally is considerably higher than pulmonary vascular resistance and systemic arteries are less compliant than the pulmonary arteries. These differences account for the shorter hangout time in the aorta than in the pulmonary artery. During inspiration, pulmonary vascular impedance declines with a further increase in the pulmonary hangout time, which appears to be the principal mechanism for inspiratory splitting of S2.The other contributions to a normal inspiratory splitting of S2 result from an increased RV ejection time. More negative intrathoracic pressure during inspiration is associated with increased venous return to the RV and greater RV stroke volume, which increases its ejection time and delays P2. Inspiratory delay of aortic valve closure is minimal, probably due to a much shorter aortic compared with pulmonary hangout time [22,23]. After one to three cardiac cycles the immediate inspiratory increase in RV stroke volume is followed by a similar increase in LV stroke volume, associated with increased LV ejection time [24]. Prolongation of the LV ejection time and a delayed A2 during normal respiration usually occur during the expiratory phase, while lengthening of the right ventricular ejection time and delayed pulmonary valve closure coincide with the inspiratory phase.The relative contributions of these different mechanisms to the normal inspiratory splitting of S2 are difficult to determine. Traditionally, it has been thought that prolongation of the RV ejection time accounts for a major part of the normal inspiratory splitting. Studies, however, suggest that the increase in pulmonary hangout time is the major contribution to normal inspiratory splitting.Wide splitting of S2 — A2 and P2 are fused in normal adults and S2 appears single during the expiratory phase of respiration, particularly in the semi-recumbent, sitting, and standing positions. Wide splitting of S2 should be suspected if the A2-P2 separation is appreciated in these positions during expiration. The A2-P2 interval needs to be 0.03 second or more to be appreciated by auscultation at the bedside.A wide splitting of S2 can result either from conduction disturbances or hemodynamic causes (table 2 and figure 1).●Conduction disturbances – Conduction anomalies that cause wide splitting of S2 include complete right bundle branch block, artificial pacing from the LV, and the Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome with LV preexcitation. Premature beats and an idioventricular rhythm of LV origin (QRS complex of right bundle branch block morphology) are also associated with wide splitting.Wide splitting of S2 due to conduction disturbances results from delayed activation of the RV and, consequently, delayed completion of RV ejection. Widened splitting of S2 during inspiration and concomitant splitting of S1 occur in these circumstances.●Hemodynamic causes – Increased resistance to RV ejection and prolongation of RV ejection time are other important causes of wide expiratory splitting of S2. Pulmonary valve and infundibular stenosis, supravalvular and pulmonary branch stenoses, and pulmonary arterial hypertension of any etiology lengthen RV ejection time and cause relatively wide splitting of S2. The intensity of P2 is related to the pulmonary arterial diastolic pressure; a lower pressure is associated with a reduced intensity and a higher pressure with increased intensity. Thus, in patients with pulmonary valve and infundibular stenoses, wide splitting of S2 is associated with reduced intensity of P2, while P2 is accentuated in pulmonary hypertension and pulmonary branch stenosis.In pulmonary valve stenosis, the degree of expiratory splitting of S2 (the A2-P2 interval) is directly related to the severity of stenosis and RV systolic hypertension [25]. Further splitting of S2 during inspiration usually occurs in these conditions, but wide splitting of S1 is not observed.Although expiratory splitting is obvious in pulmonary hypertension, the degree of splitting is much less than in other conditions, which also increase the resistance to RV ejection. This is because of a significant reduction in pulmonary hangout time due to decreased pulmonary vascular compliance in pulmonary hypertension [20]. For the same reason, the magnitude of inspiratory widening of the splitting of S2 is smaller. Thus, in patients with chronic pulmonary arterial hypertension, a relatively narrow expiratory splitting of S2 is expected with only a slight inspiratory increase.Isolated reduction of the LV ejection time may also cause wide splitting of S2 due to the early occurrence of A2. The best example is significant mitral regurgitation, which decreases impedance to LV ejection and forward stroke volume [26]. In some patients with a ventricular septal defect with increased pulmonary flow and decreased pulmonary vascular resistance, wide splitting of S2 can occur due to the same mechanism, although a delay in the onset of RV mechanical systole has also been observed [27]. Inspiratory widening of S2 is maintained in patients in this category, and S1 usually remains normal. Inspiratory reduction in LV ejection time can also occur in constrictive pericarditis, which may account for the wide inspiratory splitting of S2 that occasionally is observed in these patients [28].Wide and "fixed" splitting of S2 — Fixed splitting of S2 has been defined as ≤20 msec of variation in the A2-P2 interval between the inspiratory and expiratory phases of respiration [18]. However, such limitation in variation of splitting may be difficult to discern clinically, so wide and variable splitting may be difficult to distinguish from wide and fixed splitting.One common cause of wide and fixed splitting of S2 is a large interatrial communication (atrial septal defect, common atrium) and left-to-right or bidirectional shunt; abnormally wide splitting of S2 occurs and respiratory variations of the A2-P2 intervals are minimal or absent. The mechanism of wide expiratory splitting of S2 in atrial septal defect appears to result from isolated shortening of LV ejection time while the RV ejection time remains normal, and an increase in pulmonary hangout time due to decreased pulmonary vascular impedance (table 2) [18,29].The other cause of fixed splitting of S2 is RV failure, when the RV is unable to vary its stroke volume during inspiration, and inspiratory prolongation of its ejection time and delay of P2 does not occur. Therefore, any condition that induces severe RV failure, such as RV outflow obstruction, pulmonary hypertension, and primary RV dysfunction can be associated with fixed splitting (table 2).Reversed (paradoxic) splitting of S2 — Paradoxic splitting occurs when A2 follows P2 during the expiratory phase of respiration. The splitting of S2 is then maximal during expiration and the splitting is less or S2 becomes single during inspiration with the normal inspiratory delay of P2 [1,30].Reversed splitting of S2 may result from either conduction disturbances or hemodynamic causes (table 2).●Conduction abnormalities – Left bundle branch block, artificial RV pacing, preexcitation of the RV (Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome), and premature beats of RV origin are examples of conduction disturbances associated with reversed splitting of S2. Delayed activation of the LV, and consequently delayed completion of LV ejection, causes a delayed A2 and reversed splitting of S2. In left bundle branch block or the preexcitation syndrome, splitting of S1 does not usually occur. Splitting of S1, however, may accompany splitting of S2 with RV pacing or ectopic beats. With a lesser degree of left bundle branch block or RV preexcitation, the P2-A2 interval during expiration may be very short (reversed splitting), and normal splitting can occur during inspiration.●Hemodynamic factors – A markedly prolonged LV ejection time may delay A2 sufficiently to cause reversed splitting of S2. With fixed LV outflow tract obstruction, as in patients with aortic valve stenosis, LV ejection time is lengthened and reversed splitting of S2 usually indicates hemodynamically significant outflow obstruction. However, P2 may be inaudible due to the long ejection systolic murmur of aortic stenosis, making it difficult to recognize the reversed splitting.The distinction between hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and mitral regurgitation or ventricular septal defect, conditions in which the character and locations of the systolic murmur may appear similar on auscultation, is facilitated by recognizing the character of S2 splitting. Reversed splitting suggests hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, while physiologic splitting favors mitral regurgitation or ventricular septal defect.Reversed splitting of S2 is observed in some patients with hypertension. However, the P2-A2 interval in expiration is usually short and normal inspiratory splitting occurs.A prolonged LV ejection time and reversed splitting of S2 can occur with myocardial dysfunction, as in myocardial ischemia [31]. However, reversed splitting is rarely observed with severe heart failure because of the concomitant decrease in stroke volume, which is an important determinant of LV ejection time.A selective increase in LV forward stroke volume may prolong LV ejection time sufficiently to cause reversed splitting of S2; this explains reversed splitting of S2 in some patients with patent ductus arteriosus with a large left-to-right shunt and in patients with significant chronic aortic regurgitation. Reversed splitting of S2 is often difficult to recognize by auscultation because the inspiratory noise often obscures a relatively soft P2.Single S2 — A single S2 may result from the absence of either of the two components of S2 or from the fusion of A2 and P2 without inspiratory splitting (table 2).●Absence of A2 is occasionally observed in severe calcific aortic stenosis with an immobile aortic valve. A2 may be absent in some patients with severe aortic regurgitation due to destruction of the valve leaflets.●P2 is absent in the congenital absence of the pulmonary valve, pulmonary atresia, and truncus arteriosus. In severe pulmonary valve stenosis or in tetralogy of Fallot, P2 may be markedly attenuated and escape recognition by auscultation.●Fusion of A2 and P2 without inspiratory splitting occurs in Eisenmenger syndrome with ventricular septal defect and in patients with a single ventricle.A truly single S2 is rare. An apparently single S2 usually results from the inability to hear or record P2 due to emphysema, obesity, or pericardial effusion.THIRD (S3) AND FOURTH (S4) HEART SOUNDS — S3 and S4 are low-frequency diastolic sounds that appear to originate in the ventricles. (See "Examination of the precordial pulsation".)Mechanism — The precise mechanism of the genesis of S3 and S4 has not been identified with certainty. It is generally agreed that both sounds, occasionally termed “ventricular filling sounds,” are associated with ventricular filling and an increase in ventricular dimensions. They are heard and recorded during rapid filling and atrial filling phases of the ventricle, respectively [32].●S3 occurs as passive ventricular filling begins after actual relaxation is completed [33]. It appears to be related to a sudden limitation of the movement during ventricular filling along its long axis [34]. It coincides with the y descent of the atrial pressure pulse and the end of the rapid filling phase of the apical impulse, occurring usually 0.14 to 0.16 second after second heart sound (S2).●S4 occurs after the P wave on the electrocardiogram and coincides with atrial systole and a waves of the atrial pressure pulse, and with the apical impulse.AuscultationGeneral issues — S3 and S4 are best heard with the bell of the stethoscope. Auscultation over the cardiac apex in the left lateral decubitus position is preferable for identification of left ventricular S3 and S4. Right ventricular S3 and S4 are best heard along the lower left sternal border; occasionally, right-sided filling sounds are also heard over the lower right sternal border and over the epigastrium. The intensity of S3 and S4 of right ventricular origin usually increases during inspiration, while that of left ventricular origin remains unchanged. S3 is closer to S2 and S4 occurs prior to first heart sound (S1).S3 can be heard and recorded in healthy young adults. However, it is usually abnormal in patients over the age of 40 years, suggesting an enlarged ventricular chamber.S4 can be heard in many healthy older adults without any other cardiac abnormality due to decreased ventricular compliance with age. S4 may become audible in otherwise healthy subjects with a prolonged PR interval due to the separation of S4 from S1. In patients with complete atrioventricular block, S4 is heard at a faster rate than S1 and S2 and may not indicate any hemodynamic abnormality. S4 is usually abnormal in young adults and children.Distinguishing from split S2 or S1 — S3 and S4 may be confused with a split S2 and split S1, respectively. When split, the two parts of S1 or S2 typically have a similar pitch, while S3 and S4 are lower pitched sounds than S2 and S1.This difference in pitch can be brought out by listening with the bell and the diaphragm of the stethoscope. The lower pitched S3 and S4 will be more pronounced when listening gently with the bell, while the higher-pitched split S1 and S2 will be more pronounced when listening with the diaphragm or when applying the bell more firmly to the skin. (See 'Stethoscopes' above.)Auscultation to distinguish S3 and S4 from splitting of S2 and S1 is best performed in the 45 degree left lateral decubitus position (ie, with the chest rotated toward the examining table). The location of the sound is useful in distinguishing S4 from a split S1. The left ventricular S4 is usually localized over the cardiac apex, and becomes softer as the bell of the stethoscope is moved gradually to the left sternal border.Gallops — An abnormal S3 and S4 tend to be louder and of higher pitch (sharper) and are frequently referred to as gallops. S3 is the ventricular gallop and S4 is the atrial gallop sound. S3 and S4 can be fused during tachycardia to produce a loud diastolic filling sound, termed a “summation gallop” [35]. At the bedside, carotid massage can cause separation of S3 and S4 as the heart rate slows. S3 and S4 may occasionally be intensified or precipitated by exercise or by sustained hand grip. Gallops can sometimes be seen and palpated. (See "Examination of the precordial pulsation".)Effective atrial contraction and ventricular filling are both required for production of atrial gallop sounds. Thus, these sounds are usually absent in atrial fibrillation and in significant atrioventricular valve stenosis.It is often difficult to distinguish between gallop sounds of right and left ventricular origin at the bedside when they are present in the same patient. However, if one follows the "inching" method of auscultation (eg, auscultation starting over the cardiac apex and then gradually moving the stethoscope inch-by-inch to the left lower sternal border), the decreasing intensity of gallops of left ventricular origin and the increasing intensity of gallops of right ventricular origin can be appreciated. Furthermore, the intensity of the right-sided gallop sounds increases during inspiration.Left ventricular gallops●S3 gallop – An S3 gallop is almost always present in patients with hemodynamically significant chronic mitral regurgitation; the absence of S3 is an important finding to exclude severe chronic mitral regurgitation. An S3 gallop in patients with chronic aortic regurgitation is frequently associated with a decreased left ventricular ejection fraction and increased diastolic volume; its recognition should prompt further evaluation [36].An S3 gallop is an important and common early finding of heart failure associated with dilated cardiomyopathy and may also be heard in patients with diastolic heart failure (although less frequently than with systolic heart failure), aortic valve disease, and coronary artery disease [37]. In such patients, an S3 gallop is usually associated with left atrial pressures exceeding 20 mmHg, increased left ventricular end-diastolic pressures (>15 mmHg), and elevated serum brain natriuretic peptide concentrations [38-40].The diagnostic test characteristics of the S3 and S4 for detection left ventricular dysfunction was evaluated in a phonocardiographic study of patients who were undergoing cardiac catheterization [40]. These sounds were not very sensitive (40 to 50 percent) for the detection of an elevated left ventricular end-diastolic pressure or a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction; however, the S3 was highly specific (90 percent) for these parameters and for an elevated serum brain natriuretic peptide concentration. An additional problem is appreciable interobserver variability in the ability to detect an S3 on cardiac auscultation that cannot be solely explained by the experience of the observer [41,42].The presence of an S3 gallop also has prognostic significance, being associated with a higher risk of progression to symptomatic heart failure in those with asymptomatic left ventricular dysfunction and a higher risk of hospitalization for heart failure or death from pump failure in patients with overt heart failure [43,44]. One limitation to these observations is the operator-dependence for the detection of this physical finding.An S3 often occurs in high-output states such as thyrotoxicosis or pregnancy. In these settings, it does not necessarily indicate left ventricular dysfunction [45].●S4 gallop – An audible S4 is abnormal in younger subjects and children; it is always abnormal when it is palpable, regardless of patient age.An abnormal S4 is most frequently observed in patients with decreased left ventricular distensibility [46]. Thus, S4 is common in hypertensive heart disease, aortic stenosis, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Left ventricular hypertrophy, which is present in all these conditions, contributes to decreased left ventricular distensibility.In aortic stenosis, the presence of an S4 has been reported to indicate hemodynamically significant left ventricular outflow obstruction, with a peak transvalvular gradient ≥70 mmHg and an elevated left ventricular end-diastolic pressure [47]. However, in patients over 40 years of age, S4 can occur due to myocardial disease in the absence of significant aortic stenosis. Thus, in elderly patients, the presence of an S4 cannot be used to assess the severity of aortic stenosis. Associated coronary artery disease may also cause an S4 in patients with mild to moderate aortic stenosis.An S4 is heard in the vast majority of patients during the acute phase of myocardial infarction [48]. Although pulmonary venous pressure may also be elevated, there is a poor correlation between the presence and absence of an S4 and hemodynamic abnormalities. Thus, S4 is a poor guide to assess the severity of left ventricular dysfunction in patients with acute myocardial infarction.Audible and/or palpable atrial gallops are a frequent finding in chronic left ventricular aneurysm and are usually found with left ventricular dyskinesia associated with elevated end-diastolic pressures. In patients with chronic coronary artery disease, the transient appearance of an S4, particularly during chest pain, is a strong indication of transient myocardial ischemia.A loud S4 that is also usually palpable is a frequent finding in patients with acute and severe mitral or aortic regurgitation. It is almost always associated with an increased left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (>15 mmHg) [49]. The predictive value is increased in the presence of both S3 and S4 gallops [38]. (See "Examination of the precordial pulsation".)Right ventricular gallops — An S3 gallop of right ventricular origin frequently occurs in patients with significant tricuspid regurgitation, whether it is primary or secondary to pulmonary hypertension and right ventricular failure. An S3 gallop is also heard in right ventricular failure in the absence of tricuspid regurgitation.An S4 of right ventricular origin is most commonly heard in patients with right ventricular outflow obstruction (pulmonary valve stenosis) and pulmonary arterial hypertension [50]. It likely denotes decreased right ventricular distensibility due to hypertrophy.PERICARDIAL KNOCK — Ventricular filling is confined to early diastole in constrictive pericarditis and terminates with a sharp S3; this is termed a “pericardial knock.” Its timing is earlier than a normal S3 and typically occurs 0.10 to 0.12 second after S2. It is a common finding in constrictive pericarditis and can occur with or without pericardial calcification [51]. It is occasionally heard only during inspiration and along the lower right sternal border, suggesting an early manifestation of right ventricular constriction.EJECTION SOUNDS — An aortic ejection sound is a high-frequency "clicky," early systolic sound, usually recorded 0.12 to 0.14 second after the Q wave on the electrocardiogram. It is best heard with the diaphragm of the stethoscope and is widely transmitted, heard at the cardiac apex and also over the right second interspace. Its intensity does not vary with respiration.When aortic or pulmonary ejection sounds occur in the presence of normal semilunar valves, the origin may be the proximal aortic or pulmonary artery segments. Thus, the term “vascular ejection sound” has been suggested. These sounds generally tend to occur later and are not associated with "doming" of the semilunar valves, which is characteristic of a valvular ejection sound. The mechanism of the vascular ejection sound remains unclear.Aortic ejection sound — Aortic ejection sounds occur in association with a deformed but mobile aortic valve and with aortic root dilatation. Thus, it is present in aortic valve stenosis, bicuspid aortic valve, aortic regurgitation, and with aneurysm of the ascending aorta. An aortic ejection sound is also heard in some patients with systemic hypertension, probably due to associated aortic root dilatation.Aortic ejection sounds are heard frequently in patients with mild to moderate aortic valve stenosis; they may be absent in severe calcific aortic stenosis, presumably due to the loss of valve mobility [52]. Since ejection sounds are usually absent in subvalvular and supravalvular aortic stenosis, the presence of an ejection sound helps to identify the site of obstruction at the level of the aortic valve. An ejection sound also does not favor the diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.Identification of the aortic ejection sound is the most important and consistent bedside clue for the diagnosis of an uncomplicated bicuspid aortic valve [53]. In patients with coarctation of the aorta, an aortic ejection sound usually signifies the presence of an associated bicuspid aortic valve.Pulmonary ejection sound — A pulmonary ejection sound occurs earlier than an aortic ejection sound and is recorded 0.09 to 0.11 second after the Q wave on the electrocardiogram, beginning at the time of maximal opening of the pulmonary valve. It is also a "clicky" sound of high frequency and is best heard with the diaphragm of the stethoscope. In contrast to the aortic ejection sound, it is not widely transmitted and usually best heard at the left second interspace and along the left sternal border; it is not usually heard over the cardiac apex or right second interspace.The most helpful distinguishing feature of a pulmonary ejection sound is its decreased intensity, or even its disappearance during the inspiratory phase of respiration. During expiration, the valve opens rapidly from its fully closed position; sudden "halting" of this rapid opening movement is associated with a maximal intensity of the ejection sound. With inspiration, the increased venous return to the right ventricle augments the effect of right atrial systole and causes partial opening of the pulmonary valve prior to ventricular systole. The lack of a sharp opening movement of the pulmonary valve explains the decreased intensity of the pulmonary ejection sound during inspiration.The tricuspid closure sound should not be confused with the pulmonary ejection sound. The intensity of tricuspid closure sound tends to increase rather than decrease during inspiration.Pulmonary ejection sounds tend to be present in clinical conditions associated with a deformed pulmonary valve and pulmonary artery dilatation, including pulmonary valve stenosis, idiopathic dilatation of the pulmonary artery, and chronic pulmonary arterial hypertension of any etiology [54-57]. The interval between the S1 and the pulmonary ejection sound is directly related to the right ventricular isovolumic contraction time, which usually is prolonged in pulmonary hypertension, explaining a relatively late occurrence of the ejection sound in these patients. With increasing severity of pulmonary valve stenosis, the isovolumic systolic interval shortens, and the pulmonary ejection sound therefore tends to occur soon after S1. In patients with very severe pulmonary valve stenosis, the ejection sound can fuse with S1 and may not be recognized.NON-EJECTION SYSTOLIC SOUNDS — The non-ejection systolic sounds are also high-frequency sounds that occur much later after first heart sound (S1) and are best heard with the diaphragm of the stethoscope. These sounds are not widely transmitted and not usually heard over the right or left second interspace.Midsystolic click — Prolapse of the mitral valve is the most common cause for a non-ejection midsystolic click; the timing coincides with maximal prolapse of the mitral valve into the left atrium. It may or may not be associated with a late systolic murmur (movie 1 and movie 2) [58-61]. (See "Definition and diagnosis of mitral valve prolapse".)When the click occurs early in systole, it can be confused with the ejection sound or the second component of a widely split S1. A number of bedside maneuvers can be performed to confirm the presence of a midsystolic click. These maneuvers are based upon the fact that the systolic dimension or volume at which mitral valve prolapse and the click occurs tends to remain fixed in the same patient [62]. Thus, whenever the "click" volume or dimension is reached following the onset of ventricular ejection (corresponding roughly to S1), a midsystolic click occurs. The S1-click interval, then, can vary according to the preejection (end-diastolic) ventricular volume and the rate of ejection.●The S1-click interval will increase, producing a late midsystolic click whenever there is an increase in end-diastolic volume (supine position, squatting, hand grip) (movie 2).●The S1-click interval usually shortens and the click tends to occur earlier when there is a reduction in end-diastolic volume (standing, phase 2 Valsalva maneuver, amyl nitrite) or when there is an increased rate of ejection as occurs after an ectopic beat as a result of post ectopic potentiation (movie 1).It is important to identify the other cardiovascular anomalies that may accompany mitral valve prolapse, including Marfan syndrome, atrial septal defect (secundum or primum), musculoskeletal abnormalities, systemic lupus erythematosus, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and pseudohypertrophic muscular dystrophy. When no obvious association is identified, the idiopathic mitral valve prolapse syndrome is diagnosed, which has been variously termed as Barlow's syndrome, billowing mitral valve, or floppy valve [58].Tricuspid valve prolapse also produces high-frequency midsystolic, "clicky" sounds; these are best heard with the diaphragm of the stethoscope over the lower left sternal border and occasionally over the lower right sternal border. The interval between S1 and the tricuspid valve click tends to increase following inspiration and after raising the legs and other maneuvers that increase right ventricular volume. Isolated tricuspid valve prolapse occurs only rarely, and in most instances it accompanies mitral valve prolapse. Tricuspid valve prolapse, however, may occur in the absence of mitral valve prolapse in patients with Ebstein's anomaly.Precordial honk — The systolic "whoop" or "precordial honk" are short musical systolic murmurs often preceded by a click and occurring in mid or late systole. These sounds can be transient, occur only in certain positions, or may be precipitated by exercise. Mitral valve prolapse is the cause for the "whoop" or "honk" in most cases [63,64].Pseudo-ejection sound — A nonejection sound has been observed to occur in some patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, associated with systolic anterior motion of the anterior mitral leaflet. This sound has been termed a “pseudo-ejection sound” [65]. Unlike the ejection click of aortic stenosis, this sound begins considerably after the upstroke of the carotid pulse. The precise mechanism of the pseudo-ejection sound in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy remains unclear. It may either result from contact of the anterior leaflet with the septum or from the deceleration of blood flow in the left ventricular outflow tract.EARLY DIASTOLIC HIGH-FREQUENCY SOUNDS — The most common causes for sounds occurring in diastole include the opening snap of the mitral or tricuspid valve or a tumor plop associated with an atrial myxoma (table 3).Opening snap — The opening snap is a high-frequency, early diastolic sound associated with mitral or tricuspid valve opening. This opening of the atrioventricular valves, which is normally silent, becomes audible in the presence of pathologic conditions.Mitral valve — Mitral stenosis is the most frequent and important cause of an opening snap. It can occur rarely in patients with pure mitral regurgitation [49,66].The opening snap is best heard with the diaphragm of the stethoscope, medial to the cardiac apex. It is usually widely transmitted and can be easily heard over the left second interspace and along the left sternal border. The opening snap coincides with the full opening of the mitral valve and occurs 0.04 to 0.12 second after second heart sound (S2) (movie 3) [67].The opening snap can easily be confused with a split S2 since it is frequently transmitted to the left second interspace. However, careful auscultation over the left second interspace, in the supine position and during both phases of respiration, reveals three high-frequency sounds in close proximity to each other during inspiration; the initial two are the two components of S2, and the third is the opening snap. The recognition of these three sounds during inspiration helps to differentiate mitral stenosis, as seen in mitral valve obstruction, from atrial septal defect, which may also be associated with a mid-diastolic rumble. In atrial septal defect, only the two components of the S2 are heard during expiration and inspiration.The opening snap results from rapid opening of the mitral valve to its maximal open position; thus, mobility of the valve contributes to its genesis. It is absent when the mitral valve is heavily calcified and immobile. However, the opening snap is heard in the vast majority of patients with mitral stenosis, and along with an accentuated first heart sound (S1), frequently provides the first clue to the diagnosis.The severity of mitral stenosis can be assessed at the bedside by noting the interval between the aortic component of S2 and the opening snap. The S2-opening snap interval is related to the difference in pressures at the time of aortic valve closure and the opening of the mitral valve, which occurs during the isovolumic relaxation phase when the left ventricular pressure falls below the left atrial pressure. When mitral stenosis is severe, left atrial pressure is higher and the pressure crossover point between the left ventricle and left atrium is closer to S2, which reduces the S2-opening snap interval. At the bedside, the shorter S2-opening snap interval sounds like a widely split S2.The S2-opening snap interval is not only related to the height of the left atrial pressure but also to aortic valve closing pressure. Thus, with a higher aortic valve closing pressure (systemic hypertension) and earlier closure of the aortic valve, the S2-opening snap interval may be longer with the same degree of elevation of left atrial pressure. Similarly, when the aortic valve dosing pressure is lower (aortic regurgitation and aortic stenosis), aortic valve closure is later and the S2-opening snap interval becomes shorter with the same degree of mitral stenosis. The S2-opening snap interval also becomes shorter when mitral stenosis is associated with mitral regurgitation with a large v wave. Furthermore, tachycardia decreases the S2-opening snap interval as the left atrial pressure increases with increasing heart rate in mitral stenosis. Thus, assessment of the severity of mitral stenosis by estimating the S2-opening snap interval alone should be done with caution in the presence of tachycardia, hypertension, mitral regurgitation, and aortic valve disease. (See "Pathophysiology, clinical features, and evaluation of mitral stenosis".)Tricuspid valve — Tricuspid valve stenosis may be associated with a tricuspid valve opening snap that is not widely transmitted and is heard best over the lower left sternal border. The tricuspid opening snap can also be heard in some patients with an atrial septal defect and a large left-to-right shunt [18].Tumor plop — Early diastolic sounds (tumor "plop") are occasionally heard in atrial myxoma. These sounds appear to occur when tumors move into the ventricle and come to a sudden halt [6]. (See "Cardiac tumors".) Vegetation plop — Vegetation plop is an early diastolic sound that is occasionally heard in bacterial endocarditis. It appears that this sound is produced when a large vegetation attached to mitral valve leaflet enters the left ventricle during early diastole [68].Other causes — A high-frequency, diastolic sound can be heard in other conditions and should be differentiated from the opening snap or tumor plop.●In some patients with mitral valve prolapse, a high-frequency sound is heard in early diastole that appears to be related to the rapid inward movement of the prolapsed mitral valve toward the left ventricular cavity before the opening of the mitral valve [69]. This early diastolic sound should not be confused with an opening snap due to mitral stenosis.●In some patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy who have a small left ventricular cavity size, early diastolic high-frequency sounds are heard coinciding with the time of contact of the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve to the interventricular septum [70].●High-frequency early diastolic sounds, similar to the opening snap, can be heard in some patients with severe mitral regurgitation due to ruptured chordae.ARTIFICIAL VALVE SOUNDS — The various types of prosthetic and tissue valves that are in use for valve replacement may produce both opening and closing sounds. The relative intensity of the opening and closing sounds vary according to the type and design of the prosthetic valve used (table 4). The artificial valve sounds are of high frequency, are much louder than normal valve sounds, and are of a "clicky" character. The opening or closing sound may consist of multiple clicks, which do not necessarily indicate valve malfunction.●The closing sound is generally louder than the opening sound with a disk valve.●Both the opening and closing sounds are loud with the ball and cage type of valve.●The closing sounds of the porcine valve are much louder than the opening sounds.Ball variance — “Ball variance” is a term used to describe certain physical changes in a cage ball and is associated with changes in the intensity of opening and closing sounds [71]. Ball variance was related to a specific model of the caged ball type of prosthetic valve, which is rarely used at the present time.Valve malfunction — Changes in the normal sounds produced by the prosthetic valve may indicate valve malfunction. However, malfunction of an artificial valve can exist despite a normal intensity or character of the opening or closing sounds. Doppler echocardiography and cardiac catheterization are usually necessary to establish this diagnosis. (See "Complications of prosthetic heart valves" and "Management of patients with prosthetic heart valves".)●The closing sound is usually louder than the opening sound regardless of the type of prosthetic valve used. A decreased intensity of the closing sound should raise the possibility of malfunction of the artificial valve.●The absence of an opening click has been found in dehiscence of a mitral valve prosthesis [72].●Obstruction of a prosthetic valve in the mitral position may be associated with a markedly decreased S2-opening sound interval. A marked variation in the S2-mitral prosthesis opening sound may indicate malfunction of the Bjork-Shiley mitral prosthesis. The variation in this interval usually does not exceed 25 msec with a normally functioning prosthesis [73].PERICARDIAL FRICTION RUB AND OTHER ADVENTITIOUS SOUNDS — A pericardial rub is generated by the friction of two inflamed layers of the pericardium and occurs during the maximal movement of the heart within its pericardial sac. Thus, the rub can be heard during atrial systole, ventricular systole, and the rapid-filling phase of the ventricle (three-component rub). However, the rub may be present only during one (one component) or two phases (two components) of the cardiac cycle. In myopericarditis following transmural myocardial infarction, a one-component rub, usually during ventricular systole, is more frequent than two- or three-component rubs.Pericardial rubs are of scratching or grating quality and appear superficial. They are best heard with the diaphragm of the stethoscope. The intensity frequently increases after application of firm pressure with the diaphragm, during held inspiration, and with the patient leaning forward. The rub may be localized or widespread, but usually is heard over the left sternal border. (See "Clinical presentation and diagnostic evaluation of acute pericarditis".)Pericardial rubs should be distinguished from the other superficial "scratchy" sounds.●In patients with thyrotoxicosis, a to-and-fro, high-pitched sound may be heard over the left second interspace, known as a Means-Lerman scratch; it may simulate a pericardial friction rub. (See "Overview of the clinical manifestations of hyperthyroidism in adults".)●Acute mediastinal emphysema, usually a benign, relatively common complication of open heart surgery, may be associated with a "crunching" noise over the precordium that is coincident with ventricular systole (mediastinal crunch).●In patients with Ebstein's anomaly, the sail sound may be of a scratchy quality and simulate a pericardial friction rub.●The movement of the balloon flotation catheter or the transvenous pacing catheter across the tricuspid valve can cause an early systolic superficial scratchy sound that may also simulate a soft, one-component friction rub. These sounds frequently disappear with the alteration of patient position.●A pleuropericardial rub results from the friction between the inflamed pleura and the parietal pericardium; it can be heard only during the inspiratory phase of respiration.●Twitching of the intercostal muscles or of the diaphragm during artificial pacing may cause a superficial scratchy and high-frequency sound unrelated to the cardiac cycle. This sound is called “pacemaker heart sound.” The twitching of the intercostal muscles results from stimulation of the adjacent intercostal nerves by the pacemaker stimulus [13].●Inadvertent entry of air into the right ventricular cavity via the systemic venous system may occur during placement of catheters or pacemakers in the right side of the heart or as a complication of needle aspiration biopsy of the lungs. The movement of air in the right ventricular cavity with systole and diastole may produce peculiar "slushing" or crunching sound ("mill wheel" murmur) over the entire precordium, which can occasionally resemble pericardial friction rub [74].●Swallowing sounds – These sounds are produced during swallowing and can be confused with heart sounds. It is postulated that these sounds are produced by vibrations of the vocal cords during swallowing [75].SUMMARY●The intensity of the first heart sound can be helpful in assessing left ventricular function and hemodynamics. •A loud first heart sound in the absence of a short PR interval indicates increased peak rate of rise of left ventricular systolic pressure (dP/dt). (See 'Increased intensity of S1' above.)  •A soft first heart sound in the absence of prolonged PR interval usually indicates increased left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP) and decreased peak dP/dt. (See 'Decreased intensity of S1' above.)●A paradoxical splitting of second heart sound (S2) in the absence of left bundle branch block and in absence of left ventricular outflow obstruction indicates impaired contractile function. (See 'Reversed (paradoxic) splitting of S2' above.) ●A third heart sound (S3) gallop in adults in the absence of mitral regurgitation usually indicates elevated LVEDP and increased brain natriuretic peptide levels. (See 'Left ventricular gallops' above.) ●A pericardial rub is characteristically a scratching or grating sound that may have one, two, or three components. (See 'Pericardial friction rub and other adventitious sounds' above.)
		
