
			INTRODUCTION — Excessive alcohol consumption is associated with a range of hepatic manifestations, including alcoholic fatty liver disease (with or without steatohepatitis), alcoholic hepatitis, and cirrhosis. Patients with an alcohol intake of 30 or more grams per day (one standard drink contains 14 grams of alcohol (figure 1)) are at increased risk of cirrhosis, although the majority of patients will not develop cirrhosis despite heavy alcohol intake (point prevalence of 1 percent for those who drink 30 to 60 g/day and 6 percent for those who drink 120 g/day) [1]. Unfortunately, among those who do develop liver disease, symptoms often develop only after severe, life-threatening liver disease has already developed. This topic will review the clinical manifestations and diagnosis of alcoholic fatty liver disease and alcoholic cirrhosis. The management of alcoholic liver disease, the pathogenesis of alcoholic liver disease, and the approach to patients with alcoholic hepatitis are discussed separately. (See "Prognosis and management of alcoholic fatty liver disease and alcoholic cirrhosis" and "Cirrhosis in adults: Overview of complications, general management, and prognosis" and "Pathogenesis of alcoholic liver disease" and "Alcoholic hepatitis: Clinical manifestations and diagnosis" and "Alcoholic hepatitis: Natural history and management" and "Liver transplantation in alcoholic liver disease".)In 2010, the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases and the American College of Gastroenterology issued a joint guideline for the evaluation and management of patients with alcoholic liver disease [2]. Another guideline was published in 2012 by the European Association for the Study of the Liver [3]. The discussion that follows is generally consistent with these guidelines.EPIDEMIOLOGY — Alcohol abuse is common worldwide, with an estimated lifetime prevalence of 18 percent among adults in the United States. It was estimated that in 2010, alcohol-attributable cirrhosis was responsible for 493,300 deaths (1 percent of all deaths) [4]. In the United States, the National Institutes of Health estimated that in 2009, there were more than 31,000 deaths from cirrhosis and that alcohol played a role in 48 percent of those deaths (age-adjusted death rate of 4.5 deaths per 100,000 population) [5]. (See "Risky drinking and alcohol use disorder: Epidemiology, pathogenesis, clinical manifestations, course, assessment, and diagnosis".)Rates of alcoholic liver disease are higher in areas with greater per capita alcohol consumption compared with areas with low levels of consumption. Areas with high rates of alcohol consumption and alcoholic liver disease include Eastern Europe, Southern Europe, and the United Kingdom [6]. Alarm over the rising impact of alcoholic liver disease has provoked national response in the United Kingdom to address this crisis [7]. On the other hand, countries with large Muslim populations have the lowest rates of alcohol consumption and alcoholic liver disease. The United States is intermediate in its level of consumption (9.4 L per adult per year, compared with 13.4 L per year in the United Kingdom and 0.6 L per year in Indonesia).NATURAL HISTORY — Alcohol abuse may lead to steatosis, steatohepatitis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatic steatosis is seen in approximately 90 percent of heavy drinkers and is typically macrovesicular [8-10]. It may be seen within two weeks of regular alcohol ingestion and resolves rapidly with abstinence [11,12]. In a study of four patients with normal baseline liver biopsies, ingestion of 98 to 138 grams of alcohol per day resulted in moderate to marked steatosis in all four after 16 to 18 days [11]. It has been estimated that a third of patients with steatosis will develop hepatic inflammation (steatohepatitis) if they continue to drink [13]. Once steatohepatitis has developed, the risk of cirrhosis is increased compared with simple steatosis. In one study, over a five-year period, cirrhosis developed in 16 percent of patients with steatohepatitis and in 7 percent of patients with simple steatosis [14]. Higher rates of progression to cirrhosis are seen among patients with steatohepatitis who continue to drink or who present with symptomatic alcoholic hepatitis (up to 50 percent for both groups) [15-18]. Overall, it is estimated that 8 to 20 percent of patients with steatosis will eventually progress to cirrhosis [19]. Hepatic decompensation is common among patients with alcoholic cirrhosis. In a population-based study from Denmark that included 446 patients with alcoholic cirrhosis, the risk of complications (ascites development, variceal bleeding, or hepatic encephalopathy) was approximately 25 percent after one year and 50 percent after five years [20]. Once hepatic decompensation develops, the expected five-year transplant-free survival rate is 60 percent for those who stop drinking alcohol and 30 percent for those who continue to drink alcohol [15,21-23]. CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS — The clinical manifestations of alcoholic liver disease depend on the severity of disease. Patients with simple steatosis are often asymptomatic, patients with alcoholic hepatitis typically present with jaundice, and patients who have developed cirrhosis may have peripheral stigmata of liver disease or signs of hepatic decompensation. (See "Cirrhosis in adults: Etiologies, clinical manifestations, and diagnosis", section on 'Clinical manifestations'.)The clinical manifestations in patients with alcoholic hepatitis are reviewed separately (See "Alcoholic hepatitis: Clinical manifestations and diagnosis", section on 'Clinical manifestations'.).Signs and symptoms — Patients with alcoholic fatty liver are typically asymptomatic [24]. Patients who have developed cirrhosis may report jaundice, weakness, peripheral edema, abdominal distension, or symptoms of gastrointestinal bleeding, such as hematemesis or melena. Patients with hepatic encephalopathy may note disturbances in their sleep pattern and confusion. (See "Cirrhosis in adults: Etiologies, clinical manifestations, and diagnosis", section on 'Clinical manifestations' and "Cirrhosis in adults: Overview of complications, general management, and prognosis", section on 'Major complications' and "Hepatic encephalopathy in adults: Clinical manifestations and diagnosis", section on 'Clinical manifestations'.)Formal health–related, quality-of-life metrics in patients with all forms of liver disease, including alcoholic liver disease, are increasingly being employed [25]. Physical examination findings — Physical examination findings in patients with alcoholic liver disease range from a normal physical examination to evidence of cirrhosis with hepatic decompensation (table 1). Patients with steatosis may have a normal examination or hepatomegaly. Patients who have developed cirrhosis may have stigmata of chronic liver disease (eg, spider angiomata, palmar erythema, gynecomastia). With hepatic decompensation, patients may develop ascites, peripheral edema, or hepatic encephalopathy. (See "Cirrhosis in adults: Etiologies, clinical manifestations, and diagnosis", section on 'Physical examination' and "Cirrhosis in adults: Overview of complications, general management, and prognosis", section on 'Major complications'.)Patients with alcoholic liver disease often have coexisting dysfunction in other organs and may have signs of cardiomyopathy, neuropathies, pancreatic dysfunction, and skeletal muscle wasting. (See "Alcoholic cardiomyopathy", section on 'Clinical presentation' and "Overview of the chronic neurologic complications of alcohol", section on 'Clinical features' and "Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis in adults", section on 'Clinical manifestations'.)Laboratory tests — There are several characteristic laboratory abnormalities in patients with alcoholic liver disease, but none are diagnostic (table 2). The classic finding is moderately elevated transaminases, with an aspartate aminotransferase (AST) to alanine aminotransferase (ALT) ratio >1 (and often >2).Liver test abnormalities — Serum aminotransferase levels may be normal or moderately elevated in the setting of alcoholic fatty liver disease and alcoholic cirrhosis [26,27]. The AST elevation is usually less than eight times the upper limit of normal, and the ALT elevation is typically less than five times the upper limit of normal. The degree of elevation does not correlate with the severity of the underlying liver disease [24]. Unlike other forms of liver disease in which the serum ALT level often is higher than the serum AST level, the most common pattern of liver biochemical test abnormalities in alcoholic liver disease is a disproportionate elevation of the AST compared with the ALT, resulting in a ratio greater than one [26-30]. As an example, in a study that included 38 patients with alcoholic liver disease, the mean AST was 92 int. unit/L, and the ALT was 80 int. unit/L (AST to ALT ratio of 1.2) [31]. The relatively lower elevation of serum ALT has been ascribed in part to hepatic deficiency of pyridoxal 5'-phosphate in alcoholics, which is a cofactor for the enzymatic activity of ALT [30]. According to this hypothesis, the altered ratio reflects a failure to appropriately increase the ALT, rather than a disproportionate elevation in AST. An AST to ALT ratio >1 is occasionally seen in patients with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and is frequently seen in patients who have developed nonalcoholic cirrhosis. However, if the ratio is greater than two, the transaminase elevations are likely due to alcoholic liver disease since values greater than two are rarely seen in other forms of liver disease [28,29]. In a study of 271 patients with biopsy-confirmed liver disorders, more than 90 percent of the patients whose AST to ALT ratio was ≥2 had alcoholic liver disease [32]. The percentage increased to greater than 96 percent when the ratio was ≥3. (See "Approach to the patient with abnormal liver biochemical and function tests", section on 'Laboratory tests'.)The gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) is often elevated in patients with alcoholic liver disease [27,33]. In a study that included 123 patients who abused alcohol, all of the patients with liver disease had elevations of the GGT approximately 8 to 10 times the upper limit of normal [33]. The GGT elevations persisted after 8 weeks of abstinence. However, GGT elevations are not specific for alcoholic liver disease. For example, elevated GGT levels may be seen in patients with biliary or pancreatic disease and in patients taking certain medications such as barbiturates and phenytoin. (See "Enzymatic measures of cholestasis (eg, alkaline phosphatase, 5'-nucleotidase, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase)", section on 'Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase'.)Elevated bilirubin levels are frequently seen in patients with decompensated cirrhosis from any cause, including alcoholic liver disease. Elevation of the bilirubin in a patient who does not have cirrhosis should raise concern for alcoholic hepatitis. Patients who are malnourished or who have cirrhosis may have low albumin levels. (See "Cirrhosis in adults: Etiologies, clinical manifestations, and diagnosis", section on 'Laboratory findings' and "Alcoholic hepatitis: Clinical manifestations and diagnosis", section on 'Laboratory tests' and "Tests of the liver's biosynthetic capacity (eg, albumin, coagulation factors, prothrombin time)", section on 'Albumin'.)Hematologic abnormalities — Hematologic findings in patients with alcoholic liver disease may include thrombocytopenia, anemia, an elevated mean corpuscular volume (MCV), a decreased lymphocyte count, an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and an elevated international normalized ratio (INR) [26,34]. Macrocytosis suggests longstanding disease and may result from vitamin B12 or folate deficiency, alcohol toxicity, or increased lipid deposition in red cell membranes. Similarly, thrombocytopenia may result from primary bone marrow hypoplasia (which can be due to alcohol and is usually brief) or splenic sequestration (due to portal hypertension and an enlarged spleen). (See "Alcohol abuse and hematologic disorders".)In one study that included 40 patients with alcoholic liver disease, the following mean laboratory test results were noted [34]:●Hemoglobin and hematocrit: 12 g/dL and 33.7 percent, respectively●MCV: 91.6 fl●Lymphocyte percentage: 24.8 percent●ESR: 25.9●INR: 1.6Other abnormalities — Additional laboratory findings that may be seen in patients who have progressed to cirrhosis include hyponatremia and an elevated creatinine in patients with hepatorenal syndrome. (See "Cirrhosis in adults: Etiologies, clinical manifestations, and diagnosis", section on 'Laboratory findings' and "Hepatorenal syndrome", section on 'Clinical presentation'.)Radiographic imaging — Transabdominal ultrasound, abdominal computed tomography, and abdominal magnetic resonance imaging may show signs of hepatic steatosis or cirrhosis in patients with alcoholic liver disease. (See 'Imaging studies' below.)DIAGNOSIS — Alcoholic liver disease may be suspected in a patient with a compatible history who has elevated serum transaminases, a suggestion of fatty liver on imaging tests, or is found to have steatosis on liver biopsy. Liver tests are generally normal or modestly elevated, and jaundice is unusual. The diagnosis is established after excluding other causes of fatty liver or cirrhosis. (See 'When to consider alcoholic liver disease' below.)Our general approach to the diagnosis of alcoholic liver disease is consistent with a 2010 guideline from the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases and the American College of Gastroenterology (table 3) and a 2012 guideline from the European Association for the Study of Liver [2,3]. The evaluation includes:●Obtaining a very detailed history to quantify alcohol use and drinking patterns and to identify other potential sources of hepatic injury (see 'History' below)●Performing a physical examination to identify stigmata of chronic liver disease (see 'Physical examination' below)●Obtaining laboratory tests to look for signs of hepatitic inflammation and to assess hepatic synthetic function, including (see 'Standard laboratory evaluation' below):•Liver blood tests – transaminases, bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, gamma-glutamyl transaminase•Complete blood count•Serum albumin level•Coagulation studies – prothrombin time, international normalized ratio (INR)●Obtaining laboratory tests to identify other causes of chronic hepatic injury, including (see 'Tests for other causes of liver disease' below):•Hepatitis B surface antigen, anti-hepatitis B core IgG•Antibodies to hepatitis C virus (HCV)•Serum ferritin and transferrin saturation for hemochromatosis•Total IgG or gamma-globulin level, antinuclear antibody, anti-smooth muscle antibody, anti-liver/kidney microsomal-1 (anti-LKM-1) antibodies for autoimmune hepatitisClinical and laboratory features are often adequate for establishing the diagnosis of alcoholic liver disease in a patient with a history of significant alcohol use, provided the patient does not have risk factors for other causes of liver disease and testing for other common causes of liver disease is negative. In a study of patients with chronically elevated liver biochemical tests, the sensitivity and specificity of clinical findings for diagnosing alcoholic liver disease were 91 and 97 percent, respectively, when liver biopsy was used as the gold standard [35]. Liver imaging may provide evidence of hepatic steatosis or cirrhosis, but it is not able to differentiate alcoholic liver disease from other causes. Ultrasound is always indicated to confirm that the liver is homogeneous and to exclude other causes of abnormal liver tests (eg, biliary obstruction, hepatic masses). More detailed liver imaging (eg, computed tomography [CT] or magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]) is obtained for patients with suspected cirrhosis or ultrasound evidence of biliary tract obstruction (eg, jaundice, elevation of liver tests in a cholestatic pattern). (See 'Imaging studies' below.)A liver biopsy may be required if the diagnosis remains uncertain following a noninvasive evaluation. In addition, it can establish the severity of liver disease. (See 'Liver biopsy' below.)When to consider alcoholic liver disease — Alcoholic liver disease should be suspected in patients with a history of significant alcohol consumption who present with:●Abnormal transaminases (particularly if the aspartate aminotransferase [AST] is greater than the alanine aminotransferase [ALT])●Hepatomegaly●Radiographic imaging suggesting hepatic steatosis or fibrosis/cirrhosis●A liver biopsy showing steatosis or cirrhosisSeveral definitions have been proposed for what constitutes significant alcohol consumption [36]. We define significant alcohol consumption as an average consumption of >210 grams of alcohol per week in men or >140 grams of alcohol per week in women over at least a two-year period, a definition that is consistent with a 2012 joint guideline from the American Gastroenterological Association, the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases, and the American College of Gastroenterology [37]. These are largely consistent with guidelines from the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.A standard drink in the United States (12 oz [360 mL] of beer, 5 oz [150 mL] of wine, 1.5 oz [45 mL] of 80-proof spirits) contains approximately 14 grams of alcohol (figure 1), so the limits above roughly translate to >15 drinks per week for men and >10 drinks per week for women.History — The history should include questioning to assess a patient's alcohol use and to elicit risk factors for other causes of liver disease. Obtaining an accurate alcohol use history in patients with suspected alcoholic liver disease can be difficult since many patients do not readily admit to heavy alcohol use. In some cases, speaking with the patient's family or friends may help in obtaining a more accurate history. Patients should be asked about their pattern of alcohol use, the type of alcohol consumed, and the amount of alcohol ingested. Several screening tools exist to identify patients who abuse alcohol. (See "Screening for unhealthy use of alcohol and other drugs", section on 'Screening tests' and 'Differential diagnosis' below and "Approach to the patient with abnormal liver biochemical and function tests".)To identify risk factors for other causes of liver disease, the patient should also be carefully questioned about medication use (including herbal supplements and over-the-counter medications), possible parenteral exposures to viral hepatitis (including transfusions, intravenous and intranasal drug use, tattoos, and sexual activity), occupational exposures to hepatotoxins, family history of liver disease, and whether the patient has a history of diseases that may be associated with liver disease (such as the metabolic syndrome, celiac disease, or autoimmune disorders). (See "Approach to the patient with abnormal liver biochemical and function tests", section on 'History'.)Physical examination — Patients with suspected alcoholic liver disease should be examined for hepatomegaly and signs of chronic liver disease such as spider angiomata, ascites, splenomegaly, and gynecomastia. (See "Cirrhosis in adults: Etiologies, clinical manifestations, and diagnosis", section on 'Physical examination'.)Physical findings in patients with alcoholic liver disease may vary from normal to evidence of cirrhosis or hepatic decompensation (table 1). Patients with alcoholic liver disease may also have extrahepatic manifestations of alcohol abuse such as cardiomyopathy, neuropathies, pancreatitis, and skeletal muscle wasting. As a result, a thorough physical examination should be carried out to identify problems outside of the liver. (See "Overview of the risks and benefits of alcohol consumption", section on 'Alcohol and specific illnesses' and "Alcoholic cardiomyopathy" and "Overview of the chronic neurologic complications of alcohol".)Laboratory tests — Laboratory testing in patients with suspected alcoholic liver disease includes testing for evidence of hepatitis and liver synthetic dysfunction. In addition, patients should be tested for other causes of liver disease that may coexist with alcoholic liver disease or may offer alternative explanations for a patient's liver disease. There are several characteristic laboratory abnormalities in patients with alcoholic liver disease, but none are diagnostic (table 2). (See 'Laboratory tests' above.)Standard laboratory evaluation — Laboratory tests that should be obtained in patients with suspected alcoholic liver disease include liver tests (serum transaminases, bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, gamma-glutamyl transaminase), a complete blood count, serum albumin, and coagulation studies (prothrombin time, INR). In addition, patients with ascites should undergo paracentesis to confirm that the ascites is due to portal hypertension (serum-to-ascites albumin gradient ≥1.1 g/dL [11 g/L]). (See 'Laboratory tests' above and "Evaluation of adults with ascites", section on 'Determining the cause of the ascites'.)There are no laboratory tests that reliably differentiate alcoholic liver disease from other causes of liver disease. However, an AST to ALT ratio >2 is highly suggestive of alcoholic liver disease. (See 'Liver test abnormalities' above.)Tests for other causes of liver disease — Patients with suspected alcoholic liver disease should also be tested for other causes of hepatitis that may be responsible for the patients liver disease or may coexist with alcoholic liver disease. The combination of alcohol use with other liver diseases such as hereditary hemochromatosis, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, chronic viral hepatitis, and autoimmune liver disease can lead to an accelerated rate of fibrosis compared with the disorders in isolation [38].In order to rule out other common causes of chronic hepatitis, patients should be tested for the following: ●Hepatitis B surface antigen, anti-hepatitis B core IgG●Antibodies to hepatitis C virus ●Serum ferritin and transferrin saturation for hemochromatosis●Total IgG or gamma-globulin level, antinuclear antibody, anti-smooth muscle antibody, anti-liver/kidney microsomal-1 (anti-LKM-1) antibodies for autoimmune hepatitisFerritin production and the plasma ferritin concentration are increased in the absence of iron overload in certain liver diseases, including alcoholic liver disease and acute or subacute hepatitis (from any cause) [39]. As a result, in patients with acute or subacute hepatitis testing should be deferred until the patient has recovered from the acute episode. In addition, the serum transferrin saturation in alcoholic liver disease may reach or exceed 60 percent, perhaps because alcohol suppresses liver transferrin synthesis. As a result, if ferritin levels or the transferrin saturation are high, additional testing for hemochromatosis is indicated. (See "Approach to the patient with suspected iron overload", section on 'Diagnosis of iron overload' and "Approach to the patient with suspected iron overload", section on 'Distinction from alcoholic liver disease'.)Additional testing will depend upon the patient's symptoms and risk factors for other causes of liver disease and may include testing for (see "Approach to the patient with abnormal liver biochemical and function tests"):●Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (see "Epidemiology, clinical features, and diagnosis of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in adults")●Wilson disease (see "Wilson disease: Clinical manifestations, diagnosis, and natural history", section on 'When to consider Wilson disease')●Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (see "Clinical manifestations, diagnosis, and natural history of alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency", section on 'Diagnosis')●Hyperthyroidism (see "Diagnosis of hyperthyroidism", section on 'Clinical manifestations')●Celiac disease (see "Pathogenesis, epidemiology, and clinical manifestations of celiac disease in adults", section on 'Clinical manifestations')●Primary biliary cirrhosis (see "Clinical manifestations, diagnosis, and natural history of primary biliary cirrhosis", section on 'Clinical manifestations at presentation')●Primary sclerosing cholangitis (see "Primary sclerosing cholangitis in adults: Clinical manifestations and diagnosis", section on 'Clinical manifestations')In some cases, if the clinical picture is only partially consistent with alcoholic liver disease (eg, liver disease in a patients with moderate alcohol use or an AST to ALT ratio <1), but no alternative causes are identified noninvasively, a liver biopsy may be required. (See 'Liver biopsy' below.)Imaging studies — Imaging studies can be used to assess for hepatic parenchymal changes, but they cannot confirm that the changes are the result of alcoholic liver disease. Ultrasound, CT, and MRI can be used to diagnose fatty change, cirrhosis, or neoplastic diseases of the liver. They can also rule out obstructive biliary pathology.Ultrasound — Ultrasound can detect hepatic steatosis, but will miss many patients with <30 percent steatosis [40,41]. Ultrasonography in patients with fatty liver may reveal a liver with a hyperechoic texture [40-42]. In patients with fibrosis, the ultrasound may reveal a coarse echo pattern. If cirrhosis has developed, nodules may be seen, causing an irregular outline of the liver surface.Studies of ultrasound for evaluation of hepatic steatosis and fibrosis have found the following:●In a study of 235 patients with suspected liver disease, the sensitivity of a hyperechoic pattern on ultrasound for hepatic steatosis was 64 percent, with a specificity of 97 percent [40]. Among patients with ≥30 percent steatosis, the sensitivity was 91 percent, with a specificity of 93 percent. ●In a study that included 35 patients with significant hepatic fibrosis (advanced fibrosis or cirrhosis), the sensitivity of ultrasound for significant fibrosis was 57 percent [41]. Among patients with established cirrhosis, the sensitivity was 71 percent. The overall specificity was 88 percent.Computed tomography — Hepatic steatosis is readily detected by CT scan [43]. Liver attenuation in patients with hepatic steatosis is lower than that seen in the spleen. On non-contrast-enhanced images, the attenuation value of normal liver is between 45 and 65 HU and is typically 8 HU higher than that of the spleen. However, in patients with hepatic steatosis, the attenuation value of the liver is typically 10 to 25 HU less than the spleen. With severe steatosis, liver attenuation may be less than unenhanced hepatic venous structures. The relative densities of the liver and spleen are highly variable on contrast-enhanced CT, so the diagnosis of steatosis is based on non-contrast-enhanced images.CT findings in patients with cirrhosis may include atrophy of the right lobe of the liver, hypertrophy of the caudate lobe, hypertrophy of the lateral segment of the left lobe, parenchymal nodularity, attenuation of hepatic vasculature, splenomegaly, venous collaterals, and ascites [44]. In some cases, the liver may be diffusely atrophic or hepatomegaly may be seen.In a study that included 35 patients with cirrhosis (20 patients), alcoholic hepatitis alone (1 patient), or hepatic steatosis (14 patients) along with 10 control patients, CT scan had a sensitivity for cirrhosis of 78 percent and for fatty liver of 81 percent. There was only one control patient with false-positive results (specificity of 90 percent).Magnetic resonance imaging and spectroscopy — Gradient echo magnetic resonance (MR) pulse sequences are sensitive for detecting hepatic steatosis [43]. Water and fat are imaged in and out of phase. With in-phase imaging, the signal intensities are additive, whereas when out-of-phase, the signal intensities cancel each other out. If there is a significant amount of intracellular fat, the signal intensity on the out-of-phase images will be lower than that seen on the in-phase images. In a study of 33 patients with diabetes (and thus at risk for nonalcoholic fatty liver disease), the sensitivity of in-phase and out-of-phase MRI for hepatic steatosis was 95 percent, with a sensitivity of 98 percent [45]. On T1-weighted and T2-weighted images, focal hepatic steatosis may result in higher signal intensity compared with normal liver.Regenerative nodules in patients with cirrhosis may appear hypointense, isointense, or hyperintense related to the background liver on T1-weighted images [44]. On T2-weighted images, the signal intensity of the regenerative nodules does not increase (unlike hepatocellular carcinoma). The nodules on T2-weighted images are often hypointense or isointense.On MRI, specific features that are suggestive of alcoholic cirrhosis versus cirrhosis from viral hepatitis include a higher volume index of the caudate lobe, smaller size of regenerative nodules of the liver, and more frequent visualization of the right posterior hepatic notch [46]. In a study that included 23 patients with chronic hepatitis, diffusion-weighted MRI had a sensitivity for detecting advanced fibrosis or cirrhosis of 83 percent, with a specificity of 80 percent.MR spectroscopy is a specialized MRI sequence that allows assessment of the chemical composition of tissue. Proton MR spectroscopy can be used to quantify lipid content [47]. It has been used to estimate hepatic fat volume fractions and correlates well with histology [48]. However, the technique is not widely available.An experimental tool for diagnosing alcoholic liver disease is hepatic phosphorus 31 MR spectroscopy, which can calculate hepatic energy metabolism and phospholipid membrane metabolism [49]. Patients with cirrhosis from alcohol have lower phosphodiesterase to adenosine triphosphate (ATP) ratios than patients with cirrhosis from other causes [50].Other noninvasive methods to detect fibrosis — Other methods for the detection of hepatic fibrosis, including transient elastography and magnetic resonance elastography, are discussed in detail elsewhere. (See "Noninvasive assessment of hepatic fibrosis: Overview of serologic and radiographic tests".)Liver biopsyPatients who may need a liver biopsy — Clinical and laboratory features are often adequate for establishing the diagnosis of alcoholic liver disease in a patient with a history of significant alcohol use, provided the patient does not have risk factors for other causes of liver disease and testing for other common causes of hepatitis is negative. However, a liver biopsy may be required if the diagnosis remains uncertain following a noninvasive evaluation. In addition, it can establish the severity of liver disease. The decision to perform a biopsy should consider the confidence of the clinical diagnosis and the role that the biopsy findings would have in guiding therapeutic options. As a general rule, a biopsy may be indicated in:●Any patient with serum aminotransferase elevations that persist for more than six months without a clear explanation, even if the patient is asymptomatic.●Patients who have elevated aminotransferases and evidence of clinically significant hepatic dysfunction (eg, abnormal prothrombin time, hypoalbuminemia). If a coagulopathy is present, transjugular biopsy is usually safer than percutaneous biopsy. (See "Transjugular liver biopsy".)●Patients in whom the diagnosis of alcoholic liver disease is uncertain based on clinical and laboratory findings.●Patients who may have more than one type of liver disease (such as alcohol and hepatitis C) in whom a liver biopsy may help determine the relative contribution of these factors (picture 1).●Patients in whom a more detailed understanding of prognosis is desired. (See "Prognosis and management of alcoholic fatty liver disease and alcoholic cirrhosis", section on 'Natural history and prognostic factors'.)Histologic findings — Early changes in patients with alcoholic liver disease seen under the electron microscope include accumulation of membrane-bound large droplet (macrovesicular) steatosis, proliferation of smooth endoplasmic reticulum, and gradual distortion of mitochondria [51]. This is most often seen in the pericentral region of hepatic lobules (zone 3) [52]. Fat accumulation can be seen easily by light microscopy; inflammatory changes are minimal at this stage apart from occasional lipogranulomata in pericentral zones [53].Fat in alcoholic liver disease is typically macrovesicular and composed of neutral triglycerides. However, small droplets of triglycerides may resemble microvesicular fat (and indeed are sometimes referred to as such on pathology reports) but are not the same as the lipid droplets that form microvesicular fat in other disorders such as acute fatty liver of pregnancy (picture 2), tetracycline toxicity, and Reye's syndrome. Microvesicular fat in these conditions (which is composed of free fatty acids that are hepatotoxic) can only be detected by special stains and not on standard light microscopy.Steatosis may progress to steatohepatitis. As with steatosis, inflammation is typically first seen in zone 3. As the disease progresses, the histologic changes may extend to the portal tracts. The findings may vary among patients with regard to their extent and severity. The presence of neutrophils is a hallmark of alcoholic steatohepatitis and is unusual in chronic viral hepatitis. Their role in pathogenesis is discussed separately. (See "Pathogenesis of alcoholic liver disease".)Mallory-Denk bodies (previously called Mallory bodies or Mallory's hyaline) are eosinophilic accumulations of intracellular protein aggregates within the cytoplasm of hepatocytes (picture 4B). They represent condensations of intracellular "intermediate filaments" or cytokeratins that are normal components of the hepatocyte cytoskeleton [54]. The mechanisms underlying Mallory-Denk body formation in alcoholic liver disease are unclear. Furthermore, they are not specific for alcoholic steatohepatitis and can be seen in nonalcoholic steatohepatitis [55], Indian childhood cirrhosis (thought in part to be due to high copper intake), starvation, after jejunoileal bypass surgery for morbid obesity, or after the use of certain drugs (such as amiodarone or perhexiline). (See "Epidemiology, clinical features, and diagnosis of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in adults".)Mallory-Denk bodies do not appear to have a pathogenic role in the hepatic injury. However, their presence is an important marker of alcohol-induced injury. In a large, multicenter Veterans Administration study, Mallory-Denk bodies were detected in 76 percent of those with alcoholic hepatitis and in 95 percent of those who also had cirrhosis [56].Alcoholic fibrosis, like the other lesions seen in alcoholic liver disease, first appears in zone 3 and may progress to become panlobular, particularly in those who continue to drink [57]. Early zone 3 fibrosis, also called hyaline necrosis, predicts a high likelihood of eventual cirrhosis [58,59]. Since patients who abuse alcohol often deny having a drinking problem, the presence of zone 3 fibrosis can sometimes be used to convince a patient who drinks heavily that his or her drinking is a problem and that eventual progression to end-stage liver disease is virtually certain with continued alcohol abuse.The term "fibrosis" in this setting denotes the accumulation of scar or extracellular matrix and is potentially reversible in the absence of continued alcohol abuse. By contrast, true cirrhosis (picture 3A-B) is characterized by the presence of regenerative nodules and is generally thought to be irreversible, even in the absence of further alcohol ingestion. Cirrhosis in alcoholic liver disease may be micronodular or macronodular [60,61]. In addition, some patients with micronodular cirrhosis will later progress to macronodular cirrhosis [61]. (See "Cirrhosis in adults: Etiologies, clinical manifestations, and diagnosis", section on 'Etiologies and classification'.)DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS — There are numerous causes of hepatic steatosis and cirrhosis other than alcoholic liver disease. In particular, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis should be considered since its clinical and histologic features are very similar to those seen in patients with alcoholic liver disease. Differential diagnosis of hepatic steatosis — The differential diagnosis of hepatic steatosis includes (table 4) [37,62]:●Alcoholic liver disease●Nonalcoholic liver disease●Hepatitis C (particularly genotype 3)●Wilson disease●Lipodystrophy●Starvation●Parenteral nutrition●Abetalipoproteinemia●Medications (amiodarone, tetracycline, methotrexate, tamoxifen, glucocorticoids, valproate, anti-retroviral agents for HIV)●Reye syndrome●Acute fatty liver of pregnancy●HELLP (hemolytic anemia, elevated liver enzymes, low platelet count) syndrome●Inborn errors of metabolism (LCAT deficiency, cholesterol ester storage disease, Wolman disease)Some of these entities may be suggested by the patient's medical and social history. Other causes may be suspected based upon the patient's age such as abetalipoproteinemia, Reye syndrome, and inborn errors of metabolism, which are seen in children, or Wilson disease, which is typically seen in patients under the age of 40 years. Other causes may be suggested by the physical examination such as Kaiser-Fleisher rings in patients with Wilson disease.Based on the likelihood of a given diagnosis, specific testing can be performed to narrow the differential diagnosis. (See 'Laboratory tests' above.)Differential diagnosis of cirrhosis — Many causes of chronic liver disease may result in cirrhosis, including chronic viral hepatitis, hemochromatosis, primary biliary cirrhosis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, and autoimmune hepatitis. As with hepatic steatosis, a specific etiology for a patient's cirrhosis can often be determined through a combination of history, physical examination findings, and laboratory evaluation (table 5). (See "Cirrhosis in adults: Etiologies, clinical manifestations, and diagnosis", section on 'Determining the cause of cirrhosis'.)Differentiating alcoholic from nonalcoholic liver disease — Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the primary consideration in patients who deny alcohol abuse but have clinical features suggestive of alcoholic liver disease (such as elevated aminotransferases in the absence of serum markers of viral hepatitis).It can be difficult to distinguish NAFLD from alcoholic liver disease based upon clinical or histologic features. Some histologic features of NAFLD (such as macrovesicular steatosis and inflammation with Mallory-Denk bodies) are indistinguishable from alcoholic liver disease (picture 4A-B) [55,63]. On the other hand, features more common in alcoholic liver disease than in NAFLD include canalicular cholestasis, marked ductular reaction, acute inflammation in the portal regions, and periportal fibrosis [64]. Steatosis is not always seen in alcoholic liver disease, whereas NAFLD is generally associated with a greater degree of steatosis and nuclear vacuolization. The presence of obesity does not help differentiate alcoholic from NAFLD. While obesity is a known risk factor for NAFLD, it can also increase the risk of developing steatosis in heavy drinkers [21]. A predictive model (the alcoholic liver disease to NAFLD index [ANI]) has been proposed to distinguish alcoholic from nonalcoholic liver disease [65]. The model is based upon aminotransferase levels, mean corpuscular volume (MCV), body mass index (BMI), and sex:ANI = -58.5 + 0.637 (MCV) + 3.91 (AST/ALT) – 0.406 (BMI) + 6.35 for menAn ANI greater than zero favors a diagnosis of alcoholic liver disease, whereas an ANI less than zero favors a diagnosis of NAFLD. The probability of the patient having alcoholic liver disease rather than NAFLD is then calculated using the value obtained for the ANI: Probability = eANI/(1+eANI) The ability of the model to accurately categorize patients ranged from good to excellent in validation cohorts [65]. SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS●The clinical manifestations of alcoholic liver disease depend on the severity of disease (table 1). Patients with steatosis may have a normal examination or hepatomegaly. Patients who have developed cirrhosis may have stigmata of chronic liver disease (eg, spider angiomata, palmar erythema, gynecomastia). With hepatic decompensation, patients may develop ascites, peripheral edema, or hepatic encephalopathy. (See 'Clinical manifestations' above.)●There are several characteristic laboratory abnormalities in patients with alcoholic liver disease, but none is diagnostic (table 2). The classic finding is moderately elevated transaminases, with an aspartate aminotransferase (AST) to alanine aminotransferase (ALT) ratio >1 (and often >2). (See 'Laboratory tests' above.)●Ultrasound, computed tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging may demonstrate hepatic parenchymal changes, but they cannot confirm that the changes are the result of alcoholic liver disease (See 'Imaging studies' above.)●Alcoholic liver disease may be suspected in a patient with a compatible history who has elevated serum transaminases, a suggestion of fatty liver on imaging tests, or is found to have steatosis on liver biopsy. (See 'When to consider alcoholic liver disease' above.)●Clinical and laboratory features are often adequate for establishing a diagnosis of alcoholic liver disease. Our general approach to the diagnosis of alcoholic liver disease is consistent with a 2010 guideline from the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases and the American College of Gastroenterology (table 3) and a 2012 guideline from the European Association for the Study of Liver. The evaluation includes (see 'Diagnosis' above):•Obtaining a history to quantify alcohol use and identify other potential sources of hepatic injury (see 'History' above)•Performing a physical examination to identify stigmata of chronic liver disease (see 'Physical examination' above)•Obtaining laboratory tests to look for signs of hepatitic inflammation and to assess hepatic synthetic function (see 'Standard laboratory evaluation' above)•Obtaining laboratory tests to identify other causes of hepatic injury (see 'Tests for other causes of liver disease' above)●A liver biopsy may be required if the diagnosis of alcoholic liver disease remains uncertain following a noninvasive evaluation. In addition, it can establish the severity of liver disease. (See 'Liver biopsy' above.)
		
