
			INTRODUCTION — Cancers of the penis are rare in the United States, Europe, and other industrialized countries. However, the incidence of these malignancies is much higher in parts of South America, Africa, and Asia. The clinical presentation, pathologic features, diagnosis, and differential diagnosis of penile cancer are reviewed here. The epidemiology, staging, prognosis, and treatment for penile cancer are discussed separately. (See "Carcinoma of the penis: Epidemiology, risk factors, staging, and prognosis" and "Carcinoma of the penis: Surgical and medical treatment".)ANATOMY OF THE PENIS AND REGIONAL NODES — Externally, the penis is composed of the head or the glans penis and the shaft. A cross section of the penile shaft is shown in the following (figure 1). It consists of the skin, subepithelial connective tissue, the erectile bodies (ie, corpora cavernosum), and the urethra (surrounded by the corpora spongiosum). The head of the penis (ie, penile glans) consists of an epithelial covering and the underlying dermis but is largely made up of a "spongy" expansion of the corpora spongiosum. At birth, the glans penis is covered by an extension of the shaft skin called the foreskin. Circumcision is a procedure that removes this foreskin at birth or later in life. At the tip of the glans is the urethral meatus, which allows for urination and ejection of semen. The proximal rounded surface of the glans penis is called the corona and serves as the junction between the glans (or head) and the penile shaft. Penile lymphatics drain both the glans penis and shaft and form an interconnecting network of channels. Drainage proceeds from the superficial inguinal lymph nodes to deep inguinal lymph nodes and then to the external iliac lymph nodes in the pelvis.CLINICAL PRESENTATION — Penile carcinoma almost always presents with a skin abnormality or palpable lesion on the penis of a male patient with an average age of 50 years or older. However, penile cancer is not uncommon among younger men [1]. (See "Carcinoma of the penis: Epidemiology, risk factors, staging, and prognosis", section on 'Epidemiology'.)In a series of 243 men with newly diagnosed penile cancer, the most common signs were a painless lump (25 percent) or ulcer (13 percent) [2]. Other signs included a rash (6 percent), bleeding (4 percent), or balanitis (4 percent). While inguinal adenopathy is present in 30 to 60 percent at diagnosis, malignant infiltration of the lymph nodes is demonstrated in only approximately half of these cases (range 47 to 85 percent), while adenopathy in the remainder likely represents an inflammatory reaction [3]. As such, the presence of palpable lymph nodes alone does not make the diagnosis of penile cancer more or less likely.Distant metastatic disease is uncommon until late in the disease course, with only 1 to 10 percent of cases presenting with stage IV disease [4-9]. (See "Carcinoma of the penis: Epidemiology, risk factors, staging, and prognosis", section on 'Staging of penile cancer'.)PATHOLOGIC FEATURES — Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most common histology of penile cancer, accounting for 95 percent of cases [10]. Nonsquamous histologies that may involve the penis include melanomas, basal cell carcinoma, lymphomas, and sarcomas. (See 'Malignant lesions' below.)Penile SCC can be characterized and subclassified by microscopic histologic features into several subtypes [11]:●Usual tumors (48 to 65 percent) – These low grade lesions have little nuclear atypia and graduated keratinization. They are morphologically similar to other organ-specific SCC and can be nearly indistinguishable from normal epithelium.●Papillary tumors (5 to 15 percent) – These tumors are low grade but superficially invasive into erectile tissue. Microscopically, they have evidence of both hyperkeratosis and papillomatosis. The lack of uniform papillae, absence of koilocytosis, and jagged stromal border distinguishes it from either verrucous or warty carcinoma. Papillary tumors are not associated with human papillomavirus (HPV) infection.●Warty tumors (7 to 10 percent) – These are cauliflower-like cancers associated with HPV infection. The tumor is composed of a prominent fibrovascular core that exhibits papillomatous formations that penetrate the corpus cavernosum or spongiosum. The border with underlying stroma is jagged and irregular.●Basaloid tumors (4 to 10 percent) – These are HPV-related cancers that present as an ulcerated irregular mass. They are comprised of uniform and small basaloid cells with central necrosis and are deeply invasive into the corpus cavernosum or spongiosum. Mitotic figures predominate, and evidence of apoptosis is also seen microscopically. ●Verrucous tumors (3 to 8 percent) – These tumors are low grade and are associated with a broad pushing border instead of infiltrative growth. They are characterized by straight papillae lined by extremely well-differentiated neoplastic cells. There is hyperkeratosis on the surface with interpapillary keratin also present. ●Sarcomatoid tumors (less than 1 percent) – These are rare tumors of the penis that can be confused with malignant melanoma or sarcoma. They appear as deeply invasive ulcerated or rounded polypoid masses. Microscopically, both squamous cell and spindle cell carcinoma components are seen. It may mimic features of heterologous sarcomas (eg, leiomyosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, and angiosarcoma). Histology and tumor grade are important prognostic indicators for men with penile cancer. This is discussed in more detail separately. (See "Carcinoma of the penis: Epidemiology, risk factors, staging, and prognosis", section on 'Prognosis'.)Patterns of tumor infiltration — The manner in which squamous cell cancer infiltrates the normal tissue has been thought to reflect the tumor-host relationship. Although originally used to describe oral squamous cell carcinomas, the pattern of infiltration has been associated with the risk of nodal involvement in penile cancer. Two patterns are described [12]:●Pushing infiltration – Blocks of tumor cells invade normal tissue but keep well defined boundaries, separating it from normal tissue.●Reticular infiltration – Smaller blocks of tumor cells broadly infiltrate the normal stroma. Molecular alterations — Several genetic pathways have been associated with the development of penile cancer, including p16 and p53 [13,14]. The p16 gene encodes the protein p16INK4A, and increased expression of this protein has been seen as a late event following HPV infection and causes inactivation of the cell cycle cascade. In cervical carcinoma, increased expression of p16INK4A has been associated with malignant transformation in HPV-positive cancers. (See "Virology of human papillomavirus infections and the link to cancer", section on 'Detecting hpv'.)The tumor suppressor gene p53 encodes a transcription factor that normally blocks cell cycle progression. When altered (by deletion or mutation), it results in a loss of inhibition and results in malignant growth. Both p16 and p53 were evaluated in a retrospective study performed on 52 patients with newly diagnosed penile cancer that aimed to correlate findings with clinical outcomes. This study reported the following results [13]:●The protein p16INK4a was detected by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in 50 percent.●Alterations in p16 gene regulation were common: 62 percent had loss of heterozygosity for p16INK4a, and 42 percent showed hypermethylation of the promoter region.●HPV DNA was detected in 32 percent.●Nodal involvement was significantly associated with p16 negative IHC staining and alterations in p16 gene regulation.●Loss of heterozygosity for p53 was seen in 42 percent, but this was not associated with clinical outcomes.These results implicate HPV in the progression of penile carcinoma and suggest a role for p16. However, further characterizations of the mechanisms involved are needed. Molecular testing does not play a role in the evaluation of penile cancer at this time.EVALUATION OF SUSPECTED DISEASE — The diagnosis of penile cancer is suspected in uncircumcised men presenting with a penile mass or ulcer. The majority of cancers arise on the glans, in the coronal sulcus, or on the prepuce as either a mass or ulceration and may be associated with a secondary infection. Our initial evaluation of a penile mass or ulcer depends upon whether the clinical presentation suggests the presence of infection or malignancy:●If an infection appears to be present (eg, erythema, swelling, discharge), we prefer a four to six week course of antifungals or antibiotics, depending on the clinical exam. We reserve the use of steroids for patients with a confirmed diagnosis of an inflammatory lesion (ie, lichen sclerosus [LS]). Lesions that do not resolve after six weeks or that progress at any time should be biopsied. ●For men presenting with a penile lesion and lymphadenopathy, we suggest immediate biopsy of the penile lesion and if positive, inguinal ultrasound with fine needle aspiration of the involved lymph nodes [15]. ●The presence of other physical signs (eg, hepatomegaly) or symptoms (eg, cachexia, confusion) may indicate the presence of metastatic disease or associated metabolic abnormalities such as hypercalcemia. Such patients also require a full laboratory evaluation as well as additional imaging as appropriate (eg, computed tomography scan or brain magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]) in addition to biopsy. (See "Carcinoma of the penis: Epidemiology, risk factors, staging, and prognosis", section on 'Assessment for distant metastatic (M) disease'.)All patients require close follow-up to prevent an unnecessary delay in diagnosis.    DIAGNOSIS — The diagnosis of penile cancer is made based upon the biopsy of the penile lesion interpreted within the clinical context. The American Joint Commission on Cancer allows for a biopsy using punch, incisional, or excisional techniques. Excisional biopsy is appropriate when the complete lesion can be removed and closed with little or no alteration to penile form and function. Otherwise, we perform incisional or deep punch biopsies for larger lesions [16].DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS — The differential diagnosis of the male patient presenting with a penile lesion includes premalignant, malignant, inflammatory, and infectious etiologies [17]. Inflammatory conditions●Genital psoriasis – Psoriasis involves the genital area in 40 percent of affected individuals [18]. The plaques are erythematous with sharply defined margins that are raised above the surrounding normal skin. Typical psoriatic scales may not be present due to the moisture in the genital area. These lesions are usually asymptomatic, although some patients complain of pruritus. Psoriasis is rarely isolated to the penis; however, and the presence of psoriatic scales elsewhere distinguishes it from penile cancer. Diagnosis and treatment of psoriasis are covered separately. (See "Epidemiology, clinical manifestations, and diagnosis of psoriasis".)●Angiokeratomas – Angiokeratomas are uncommon, benign, violaceous papules with overlying scale (picture 1). They can present in both men and women, though they are more common in men. Penile angiokeratomas often occur on the glans penis, but can be found on the scrotum, thigh, and elsewhere. Typically, they are multiple and measure less than 1 cm in diameter [19]. Both of these features are useful in distinguishing it from penile cancer, which is more commonly a single larger lesion. In most patients, the lesions are asymptomatic and do not require treatment; however, intermittent bleeding, pruritus, and pain can occur. ●Lichen planus – Lichen planus involving the penis is characterized by violaceous papules on the glans (picture 2A-B). Unlike penile cancer, lichen planus lesions are rarely asymptomatic. Most patients experience pruritus, which can be severe and become intensely painful if the lesions ulcerate or erode. The disease usually heals with significant postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. The diagnosis and treatment of lichen planus are detailed separately. (See "Lichen planus", section on 'Genital lichen planus'.)Infectious conditions●Genital herpes – Genital herpes is caused by infection with herpes simplex virus (HSV1 or HSV2). The initial presentation can be severe with painful genital ulcers in association with other symptoms, including systemic symptoms (eg, fever, headache, and malaise) and tender local inguinal lymphadenopathy. In contrast, penile cancer lesions are usually painless and not associated with systemic symptoms. A clinical diagnosis of genital herpes should be confirmed with laboratory testing. The topic of genital herpes is covered in detail separately. (See "Epidemiology, clinical manifestations, and diagnosis of genital herpes simplex virus infection".)●Primary syphilis – Syphilis is a chronic infection caused by the bacterium Treponema pallidum. Primary syphilis can present with a painless papule on the penis. With time, it ulcerates to produce the classic chancre of primary syphilis, a 1 to 2 cm ulcer with a raised, indurated margin. The ulcer generally has a non-exudative base and is associated with mild to moderate regional lymphadenopathy that is often bilateral. Multiple chancres can occur infrequently, particularly in the setting of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. Unlike penile cancer, chancres heal spontaneously within three to six weeks even in the absence of treatment. Since the ulcer is painless, many patients do not seek medical attention, a feature that enhances the likelihood of transmission. The topic of syphilis is covered in detail separately. (See "Pathogenesis, clinical manifestations, and treatment of early syphilis".)Premalignant lesions — Several penile lesions are recognized as premalignant with the capacity to evolve into frankly invasive squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). These premalignant lesions are generally differentiated from SCC by biopsy. The extent to which premalignant lesions precede invasive penile carcinoma is unknown. The available evidence suggests that the majority of cases of penile SCC arise de novo [20]. As an example, in one series, only 39 of 511 men with penile cancer (8 percent) had a history of a previous or concomitant lesion [21].●Condyloma acuminata – Condyloma acuminata, also known as genital or venereal warts, are soft, papillomatous growths that are associated with human papillomavirus (HPV) infection that can occur in the anogenital area of both men and women. Although condylomata generally follow a benign course, malignant transformation has been noted, particularly in association with HPV subtypes 16, 18, 31, 33, 35, and 39 [22,23]. The increased incidence of penile carcinoma in men with condyloma acuminata was illustrated in a population based case-control study of 110 men with penile cancer and 355 control subjects, in which there was a sixfold increased risk of penile carcinoma in men reporting a history of genital warts compared with those without such a history [24]. (See "Condylomata acuminata (anogenital warts) in adults" and "Virology of human papillomavirus infections and the link to cancer".)●Erythroplasia of Queyrat – Erythroplasia of Queyrat is a carcinoma in situ (CIS) arising within the penile mucocutaneous epithelium, namely the glans and prepuce (picture 3). It has a typical velvety red, well-marginated appearance. The lesions are usually solitary and occasionally erode or ulcerate, but pain is uncommon. In this regard, they may appear quite similar to penile carcinoma. Erythroplasia of Queyrat usually affects older, uncircumcised men. The reported incidence of progression to invasive carcinoma ranges from 10 to 33 percent [25,26]. The development of ulceration and/or a papillary appearance is associated with disease progression [26]. An association with HPV 8 and 16 has been described [27]. ●Bowen's disease – Bowen's disease is a CIS occurring within follicle-bearing epithelium such as on the penile shaft (picture 4). It usually appears as a solitary, dull-red plaque with areas of crusting and oozing [25]. In one series, HPV 16 was present in four of five biopsy specimens of genital Bowen's disease [28]. If left untreated, SCC develops in approximately 5 percent of cases [29].●Bowenoid papulosis – Bowenoid papulosis is another lesion that histologically resembles CIS. However, it is most often seen in younger males and usually behaves in a benign fashion. It is characterized by multiple slightly elevated papules that are red to violet in color, which distinguish this entity from penile carcinoma (picture 5). Lesions usually form on the penile shaft, although the glans and prepuce may also be affected [29,30]. HPV has been implicated in the pathogenesis of Bowenoid papulosis [31-33]. While the clinical course of Bowenoid papulosis is usually benign [34], the disease has been known to progress to invasive SCC [32,33]. Advanced age and immunosuppression may enhance the risk of malignant progression [35].●Lichen sclerosis (LS) (also known as Balanitis xerotica obliterans) – LS is characterized by white atrophic plaques on the glans and prepuce (picture 6). These plaques eventually enlarge and coalesce into a sclerotic mass with resultant adhesions, phimosis, and meatal stenosis. Although many of the cases appear in men who have not undergone neonatal circumcision [36,37], this is not always the case [38,39]. (See "Balanitis and balanoposthitis in adults".)Although generally considered benign, there is a relationship between Balanitis xerotica obliterans and SCC in that the two may coexist, or LS may precede the later development of penile cancer: •In one report of 86 men with genital LS, premalignant or malignant histologic features developed in five cases, four of whom were HPV positive. The average lag time from onset of LS to the development of penile cancer was 17 years (range 10 to 23 years) [40].•In a second series of 130 men with genital LS, 11 had malignant or premalignant features (8.5 percent), including SCC in seven, verrucous carcinoma in two, SCC associated with verrucous carcinoma in one, and erythroplasia of Queyrat in one [38].●Leukoplakia – Chronic irritation and/or inflammation are thought to be important in the pathogenesis of leukoplakia, a rare condition that typically presents as solitary or multiple white scaly plaques often involving the meatus. Although the exact relationship to penile carcinoma is unknown, leukoplakia is often found adjacent or contiguous to areas of SCC. The premalignant nature of leukoplakia is suggested by the presence of dysplasia in 10 to 20 percent of cases [25,30]. ●Cutaneous horn – A penile cutaneous horn is an exophytic keratotic lesion formed by overgrowth and cornification of the epithelium. This appearance generally distinguishes it from penile carcinoma. Cutaneous horns typically form on the surface of preexisting lesions such as nevi, warts, or traumatic abrasions, and they are thought to represent a response to chronic preputial inflammation [41]. Malignant degeneration has been noted in cases of recurrent disease [42]. Penile cutaneous horns may evolve into or form as a result of invasive carcinoma [43,44].●Pseudoepitheliomatous keratotic and micaceous balanitis (PKMB) – PKMB is an uncommon lesion that is named for its clinical appearance as a hyperkeratotic, laminated solitary plaque on the glans [45]. PKMB often occurs in older men who are circumcised later in life. While the exact cause of PKMB remains unknown, malignant transformation into verrucous carcinoma has been reported [46-48]. The hallmark of transformation is the development of a nodular exophytic lesion within the preexisting plaque. A biopsy is required to make this diagnosis and to rule out malignant transformation. Malignant lesions — A biopsy is required to distinguish penile carcinoma from other malignancies that may present with penile lesions. Basal cell carcinoma — Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is a common skin cancer arising from the basal layer of epidermis and its appendages. Although these tumors have a low metastatic potential, they are locally invasive and can be destructive of skin and the surrounding structures. Biopsy is essential to differentiate BCC from penile carcinoma. On biopsy, BCC is characterized by nests of basaloid cells that can exhibit a variety of growth patterns (eg, nodular/ulcerative, diffuse, or superficial). Unlike SCC, they are negative for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) on IHC, which can aid in the diagnosis [49]. (See "Epidemiology and clinical features of basal cell carcinoma", section on 'Diagnosis'.)Kaposi sarcoma — Kaposi sarcoma (KS) is an angioproliferative disorder that requires infection with human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8). Approximately 18 percent of patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)-related KS have penile lesions [50]. KS is characterized by the appearance of purplish, reddish blue or dark brown/black macules, plaques, and nodules on the skin, which may ulcerate and bleed easily. The skin lesions range in size from very small to several centimeters in diameter, and they can remain unchanged for months to years or grow rapidly within a few weeks and disseminate. The systemic nature of involvement with multiple nodules or skin discolorations involving areas beyond the penis distinguishes it from penile carcinoma. There may be accompanying lymphedema of the affected extremity with or without bulky lymphadenopathy. Molecular analysis of KS lesions reveals amplified HHV-8 DNA sequences by polymerase chain reaction or HHV-8 latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA-1) expression within spindle cells by IHC staining. (See "Classic Kaposi sarcoma: Clinical features, staging, diagnosis, and treatment".)Malignant melanoma — Melanomas are the most aggressive form of skin cancer and can occur anywhere on the body. The following skin findings are suggestive of melanoma: a dark pigmented lesion with asymmetry, irregular borders, variegated color, diameter >6 mm, or a recent change in a lesion. Unlike penile carcinoma, these are typically flat lesions without associated tumor. However, ulceration can occur in both diseases. Biopsy serves to establish the diagnosis with subsequent definitive excision based upon location and extent. Melanomas are characterized by neoplastic melanocytes found throughout the epidermal layers. IHC is useful in difficult cases or in nodal metastases. The most widely used markers to make a diagnosis of melanoma include S-100, MART-1, and HMB-45. (See "Skin examination and clinical features of melanoma", section on 'Differential diagnosis'.) Extramammary paget's disease — Paget’s disease is an adenocarcinoma of apocrine gland-bearing skin that presents as a slowly expanding well-defined patch (white or erythematous) that is often pruritic (picture 7) [51]. The onset is typically insidious, which helps to differentiate it from penile carcinoma. Paget’s disease is characterized by Paget’s cells, which are mucin positive and stain for low molecular weight cytokeratins (eg, CK7 and CK20), periodic acid-Schiff (PAS), and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) [52].  Urethral carcinoma — Primary urethral cancer is a rare malignancy in men that arises commonly in the proximal segments of the urethra but can arise anywhere along the urethral length. SCCs represent the predominant histology, with approximately 75 percent of male urethral cancers being SCCs, while 15 to 20 percent are transitional cell carcinomas, and 5 to 7 percent are adenocarcinomas. The most common symptom is urinary tract obstruction, which is not common in penile carcinoma. Other symptoms include hematuria (sometimes with blood dripping from the meatus), dysuria, and/or a purulent urethral discharge. When hematuria is present, it is more often seen on initiation rather than termination of the urinary stream. A biopsy of an intra-urethral lesion serves to establish the diagnosis and differentiate this from penile cancer, which occurs on the penile surface. Location may be the only factor that allows one to differentiate SCC histology as originating from the penis versus the urethra. The clinical presentation, diagnosis, and evaluation of urethral carcinoma are covered separately. (See "Urethral cancer in men".)Metastases — Metastatic disease involving the penis is rare but is a poor prognostic indicator with median time to death of six months [53]. Penile metastases are generally a manifestation of widespread disease from another primary tumor site. Penile metastases often occur within the corpora cavernosa and are a cause of priapism. Biopsy of the lesion established the diagnosis. The poor prognosis of patients presenting with penile metastases was demonstrated in one series of 219 patients with penile metastases, over half of whom had additional metastatic foci [54]. The primary cancer arose in the bladder (30 percent), prostate (30 percent), colon or rectum (16 percent), and kidney (11 percent). SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS●Penile cancer almost always presents with a skin abnormality or palpable lesion in a male patient. It is most commonly seen in men 50 years or older but can occur in younger men. Lack of neonatal circumcision is a common associated finding. (See 'Clinical presentation' above and "Carcinoma of the penis: Epidemiology, risk factors, staging, and prognosis", section on 'Epidemiology'.)●The most common finding in men with penile cancer is a painless lump or ulcer on the penis. Although inguinal adenopathy is present in 30 to 60 percent, malignant infiltration of the lymph nodes is demonstrated in only approximately half of these cases. (See 'Clinical presentation' above.)●Primary squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) accounts for 95 percent of penile malignancies. The extent to which premalignant lesions precede invasive penile carcinoma is unknown. The available evidence suggests that the majority of cases of penile SCC arise de novo. (See 'Pathologic features' above.)●Men presenting with a mass or ulceration involving the glans, coronal sulcus, or prepuce should be evaluated for penile cancer. If penile cancer is strongly considered, histologic evaluation is mandatory. (See 'Evaluation of suspected disease' above.)●For men with penile lesions that may be infectious in nature, a course of antifungals or antibiotics may be indicated. We reserve the use of steroids for patients with a confirmed diagnosis of an inflammatory lesion (ie, lichen sclerosus [LS]). Lesions that do not resolve after six weeks or that progress at any time should be biopsied. (See 'Evaluation of suspected disease' above.)●For men presenting with a penile lesion and lymphadenopathy, we suggest immediate biopsy of the penile lesion plus inguinal ultrasound with fine needle aspiration of the involved lymph nodes rather than a "watch and see" approach. (See 'Evaluation of suspected disease' above.)●The presence of other physical signs (eg, hepatomegaly) or symptoms (cachexia, confusion) may indicate the presence of metastatic disease and identify patients who require imaging (eg, computed tomography scan or brain magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]) and further laboratory evaluation in addition to biopsy. (See "Carcinoma of the penis: Epidemiology, risk factors, staging, and prognosis", section on 'Assessment for distant metastatic (M) disease'.)●The diagnosis of penile cancer is made based upon the biopsy of the penile lesion interpreted within the clinical context. We prefer an adequate deep biopsy (ie, incisional or deep punch) because it provides the most information to inform subsequent staging and treatment decisions. SCC is characterized and subclassified microscopically by the presence of keratinization and by cellular differentiation (tumor grade) into several subtypes. (See 'Diagnosis' above and 'Pathologic features' above.)●The differential diagnosis of the male patient presenting with a penile lesion includes premalignant, malignant, inflammatory, and infectious etiologies. (See 'Differential Diagnosis' above.)
		
