
			The following represent additions to UpToDate from the past six months that were considered by the editors and authors to be of particular interest. The most recent What's New entries are at the top of each subsection.ABDOMINAL WALL AND SOFT TISSUESVicryl Rapide for closure of trunk or extremity lacerations (August 2014)Vicryl Rapide, a fast-absorbing gut synthetic suture, is sometimes used for closure of lacerations under casts or when suture removal would be difficult. It is not generally recommended for wound sites that are typically closed with nonabsorbable sutures. In a small trial that compared Vicryl Rapide with polypropylene sutures in 73 patients with trunk or extremity lacerations, the two groups had similar cosmetic outcomes [1]. However, rates of infection and train tracking (scarring perpendicular to the wound edge) were higher in patients who underwent closure with Vicryl Rapide when compared with nonabsorbable suture (infection rate 11 versus 3 percent; rate of train tracking 17 versus 8 percent). Although these findings did not reach statistical significance, the study was small and may have been under powered for these outcomes. Thus, Vicryl Rapide may be associated with more complications when used for closure of trunk or extremity lacerations, and further study is needed before it is routinely used for these wounds. (See "Closure of skin wounds with sutures", section on 'Vicryl Rapide'.)BREAST SURGERYSupplemental ultrasound screening for women with dense breasts and normal mammography (January 2015)In the United States, multiple states have passed legislation that advises supplemental whole breast ultrasound screening for women with dense breast tissue on mammography. A modeling study estimated that, for women ages 50 to 74 with heterogenously or extremely dense breasts and a negative mammogram, supplemental ultrasound screening would cost more than $100,000 per quality adjusted life year (QALY) gained, and thus would not meet generally accepted thresholds for cost-effectiveness [2]. Compared with mammography alone, for 1000 women screened biennially for 25 years, supplemental ultrasound was predicted to prevent 0.36 additional cancer deaths, and lead to an additional 354 biopsies. To date, there have been no randomized trials in average-risk women comparing mammography alone with combination ultrasound and mammography. (See "Breast imaging for cancer screening: Mammography and ultrasonography", section on 'As adjunct to mammography for screening'.)Management of the axilla in patients with breast cancer and a positive sentinel node biopsy (October 2014)For women with newly diagnosed early breast cancer and a clinically negative axillary exam, a sentinel lymph node biopsy (SNB) is frequently performed. Whether patients with positive sentinel nodes should proceed with an axillary node dissection (AND) or adjuvant radiation therapy (RT) is not entirely clear. In the After Mapping of the Axilla: Radiotherapy or Surgery (AMAROS) trial, women with a tumor <2 cm who had a positive SNB were randomly assigned to AND or regional node RT [3]. At a median follow-up of six years, there were no significant differences in axillary recurrence rates or survival outcomes. However, women who underwent axillary node dissection had a two-fold higher incidence of lymphedema. These data suggest that RT is a reasonable alternative to axillary node dissection for patients with a positive SNB. However, given the limited follow-up of this and other trials, an individualized treatment approach should be used. (See "Adjuvant radiation therapy for women with newly diagnosed, non-metastatic breast cancer", section on 'Positive sentinel node biopsy'.)Age at first live birth and breast cancer risk in BRCA1 carriers (August 2014)Various host, genetic, and environmental factors affect the individual risk of breast cancer in women who are BRCA mutation carriers. A meta-analysis of two cohort studies found that age at first live birth (AFLB) greater than 25 years was associated with lower breast cancer risk in BRCA1 carriers [4]. Furthermore, BRCA1 carriers parous at age 30 years or older had a lower risk of breast cancer compared with those parous from ages 25 to 29 years. The meta-analysis did not identify an association between AFLB and cancer risk for BRCA2 carriers. It is unclear whether AFLB affects breast cancer risk in BRCA1 carriers differently than women in the general population, among whom the converse association between AFLB and breast cancer risk is found, or whether the findings are due to biases in the selected cohorts. If validated, these data may help better tailor breast cancer risk estimates, particularly for BRCA1 carriers. (See "BRCA1 and BRCA2: Prevalence and risks for breast and ovarian cancer", section on 'Cancer risk modifiers'.)Adjuvant radiation treatment after breast sarcoma resection (July 2014)For patients with a sarcoma of the breast, surgery is the only potentially curative modality, but the risk of local recurrence with resection alone is high. Postoperative radiation treatment may lower this risk, even in women with breast sarcoma associated with prior radiation therapy. In a systematic review that included 222 such women, surgical resection plus radiation therapy was associated with a greater five-year local recurrence-free interval rate compared with surgical resection alone (57 versus 34 percent) [5]. (See "Breast sarcoma: Treatment", section on 'Adjuvant RT'.)HEPATOBILIARY AND UPPER GASTROINTESTINAL SURGERYDetermining resectability after upfront chemotherapy for locally advanced pancreatic cancer (January 2015)An increasing number of patients with locally advanced unresectable and borderline resectable pancreatic cancer are being treated with initial combination chemotherapy regimens such as FOLFIRINOX (short-term infusional fluorouracil plus leucovorin, oxaliplatin, and irinotecan) in an attempt to increase the chance of achieving a complete margin-negative (R0) resection. A multi-institutional review of 40 patients who received neoadjuvant FOLFIRINOX as initial treatment for locally advanced unresectable or borderline resectable disease suggests that postchemotherapy imaging may be unreliable at predicting resectability [6]. Although 19 were still classified as having locally advanced unresectable disease on posttreatment clinical staging, 37 (92 percent) went on to have an R0 resection. Posttreatment imaging should still be undertaken to assess for distant metastatic disease, which would preclude an attempt at resection; however, these data suggest that the determination of resectability should be made intraoperatively. (See "Initial chemotherapy and radiation for nonmetastatic locally advanced unresectable, borderline resectable, and potentially resectable exocrine pancreatic cancer", section on 'FOLFIRINOX'.)Enteral feeding in acute pancreatitis (November 2014)Some nutritional guidelines have suggested that enteral nutrition be initiated early (within 24 to 48 hours) in all patients with severe acute pancreatitis to decrease the risk of major infection, although evidence to support this recommendation is lacking. In a randomized trial, 208 patients with severe acute pancreatitis were assigned to early nasoenteric tube feeding (within 24 hours of randomization) or an oral diet at 72 hours with on-demand nasoenteric tube feeding if an oral diet was not tolerated at 96 hours [7]. There was no difference in the primary endpoint (composite of major infection or death at six months) between patients who received early versus on-demand nasoenteric tube feeding. In the on-demand group, approximately one-third of patients required nasoenteric tube feeding. This study supports our preference to initiate enteral tube feeding in patients who are unable to tolerate an oral diet within 96 hours. (See "Management of acute pancreatitis", section on 'Enteral'.)Lymphadenectomy during pancreaticoduodenectomy for pancreatic cancer (November 2014)Pancreatic malignancies in the region of the ampulla often metastasize to lymph nodes that would not be removed in the standard lymphadenectomy typically performed with pancreaticoduodenectomy. Thus, some surgeons (mainly in Japan) routinely perform extended lymphadenectomy when removing cancers of the pancreatic head. A systematic review that included four randomized trials found no differences in overall survival at one, three, or five years with extended versus standard lymphadenectomy [8]. The risks for some complications, such as lymphatic fistula, delayed gastric emptying, and pancreatic leak, were greater with extended lymphadenectomy. Given the apparent lack of survival benefit but a potential increase in complications, we continue to recommend standard lymphadenectomy rather than extended lymphadenectomy when performing pancreaticoduodenectomy for malignancy. (See "Overview of surgery in the treatment of exocrine pancreatic cancer and prognosis", section on 'Extent of lymphadenectomy'.)Imaging prior to laparoscopic cholecystectomy (October 2014)In patients who need to undergo cholecystectomy but are at intermediate-risk for having a common bile duct stone, imaging (endoscopic ultrasound [EUS] or magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography) is typically obtained prior to surgery to exclude a stone. An alternative is to proceed to laparoscopic cholecystectomy with intraoperative cholangiography. This approach was examined in a randomized trial with 100 patients at intermediate risk of having a common bile duct stone [9]. Patients were assigned to either laparoscopic cholecystectomy with intraoperative cholangiography or initial EUS (followed by ERCP if positive) and subsequent laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Patients who proceeded directly to surgery had a shorter median length of stay, without a difference in complication rates or mortality. If a surgeon experienced with intraoperative cholangiography is available, proceeding directly to laparoscopic cholecystectomy is a reasonable alternative to obtaining preoperative imaging. (See "Choledocholithiasis: Clinical manifestations, diagnosis, and management", section on 'Intermediate-risk patients'.)Postoperative antibiotics following cholecystectomy (October 2014)Antibiotics are often given to patients with acute cholecystitis to prevent infectious complications, but few studies are available to guide the use of postoperative antibiotics following cholecystectomy in this setting. In a multicenter trial that randomly assigned 414 patients with mild or moderate calculous cholecystitis to continue their preoperative antibiotic regimen or to receive no antibiotics following cholecystectomy, there were no differences in postoperative infection rates [10]. The results of this trial support the common practice of discontinuing antibiotics after cholecystectomy in patients with uncomplicated cholecystitis. Clinical judgment should dictate antibiotic management in complicated cases. (See "Treatment of acute calculous cholecystitis", section on 'Antibiotics'.)Intermittent dosing of proton pump inhibitors for peptic ulcer bleeding (October 2014)Treatment with proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) leads to elevation of gastric pH levels, which stabilizes blood clots and improves clinical outcomes. As a result, PPIs are recommended for all patients with peptic ulcer bleeding. High-dose continuous infusions of intravenous (IV) PPIs have traditionally been recommended for patients presenting with upper gastrointestinal bleeding. However, several meta-analyses of randomized trials have failed to show superior outcomes with high-dose continuous IV proton pump administration compared with intermittent dosing (eg, 40 mg IV twice daily). In addition, intermittent dosing could lead to decreased resource utilization and cost. In the most recent meta-analysis, intermittent dosing was not inferior to high-dose continuous infusions with regard to rebleeding, mortality, need for surgery or repeat intervention, or the need for urgent intervention in patients with peptic ulcers with high-risk stigmata (active bleeding, adherent clot, or a visible vessel) [11]. There was also a trend toward a decreased risk of rebleeding with intermittent dosing. Based on this cumulative evidence, for patients presenting with upper gastrointestinal bleeding, we now recommend treatment with IV pantoprazole, esomeprazol, or omeprazole (where available) at a dose of 40 mg twice daily rather than a high-dose continuous infusion. (See "Overview of the treatment of bleeding peptic ulcers", section on 'Summary and recommendations' and "Overview of the treatment of bleeding peptic ulcers", section on 'Continuous versus intermittent dosing'.)Prophylactic antibiotics before laparoscopic cholecystectomy (September 2014)Multiple meta-analyses of randomized trials comparing antibiotic prophylaxis with no antibiotic or placebo prior to elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy have found no differences in the incidence of surgical site infection. These trials have generally included 50 to 175 patients in each arm and have used a single dose of antibiotics administered just prior to surgery. A subsequent large trial randomly assigned approximately 1000 low-risk patients undergoing elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy to no antibiotics or intravenous antibiotics given preoperatively and at 12 and 24 hours postoperatively [12]. In this later trial, the incidence of surgical site infection was lower for those who received perioperative antibiotics (0.8 versus 3.7 percent without antibiotics). Despite the added cost of antibiotic administration, overall hospital costs were lower in the prophylaxis group. Further investigation is needed to determine whether the infectious risk reduction of additional antibiotic doses outweighs the risks of toxicity or bacterial drug resistance associated with increased antibiotic usage. (See "Laparoscopic cholecystectomy", section on 'Antibiotics'.)Pancreatic anastomosis following resection of the head of the pancreas (August 2014)Options for managing the pancreatic stump following resection of the pancreatic head include pancreatic anastomosis to a loop of jejunum (pancreaticojejunostomy) or to the stomach (pancreaticogastrostomy). A meta-analysis of seven trials comparing these methods found a lower risk of postoperative pancreatic fistula for pancreaticogastrostomy. The risk difference was more pronounced for higher grade International Study Group on Pancreatic Fistula (grades B and C) [13]. Pancreaticogastrostomy may be a better alternative if the pancreas is soft and friable, which is associated with an increased risk of pancreatic fistula when the jejunum is used. (See "Surgical resection of lesions of the head of the pancreas", section on 'Pancreatic-enteric anastomosis'.)LOWER GASTROINTESTINAL SURGERYNew web-based prognostic calculator for stage III colon cancer (November 2014)Web-based tools are available to assist in risk stratification and counseling about adjuvant therapy for colon cancer. Using these tools, the clinician can calculate the relative risk of disease recurrence and mortality based upon clinicopathologic and other features and the relative benefit to be gained by different types of chemotherapy. Investigators at the Mayo Clinic have developed a new web-based prognostic calculator derived from data collected from 15,936 patients with stage III colon cancer who were accrued to phase III trials since 1989 (the ACCENT database) [14]. This calculator, which is available online, uses pathologic information (T stage, grade, tumor location, and nodal status) as well as age, sex, race, body mass index, performance status, and adjuvant treatment group to estimate the probability of being recurrence-free at three years, and alive at five years beyond treatment initiation. (See "Adjuvant therapy for resected stage III (node-positive) colon cancer", section on 'Web-based tools'.)Nonoperative management of acute appendicitis (July 2014, MODIFIED October 2014)Appendectomy remains the standard of care for most patients with uncomplicated acute appendicitis. An alternative strategy is antibiotic therapy, supportive care, and observation, with appendectomy reserved for those who do not respond to this treatment or those who develop complicated appendicitis. Studies comparing antibiotics with surgery as initial treatment generally have limited follow-up. In a prospective study, 159 adults and older adolescents with suspected acute, nonperforated appendicitis were conservatively managed with amoxicillin-clavulanate and followed for two years. Surgical intervention was required within the first seven days in 11.9 percent [15]. The overall recurrence rate was 13.8 percent at two years follow-up. Given that the subset of patients least likely to fail initial non-operative management has not been definitively determined, we continue to recommend appendectomy as the initial treatment for those with acute appendicitis. (See "Management of acute appendicitis in adults", section on 'Role of nonoperative management'.)Posttreatment surveillance colonoscopy in older adults (August 2014)Expert guidelines for surveillance of patients with treated colorectal cancer (CRC) or adenomatous polyps do not specifically address when, if ever, surveillance endoscopy should be stopped. In a retrospective cohort study of more than 25,000 patients ≥50 years of age (nearly 5,000 aged 75 or older) undergoing surveillance colonoscopy at a single integrated California health system for a history of CRC or adenomatous polyps, older age was independently associated with a higher risk of post-procedure hospitalization, as was the presence of a Charlson comorbidity score of 2 or higher (table 1) [16]. The risk of post-procedure hospitalization and the impact of comorbidity should be taken into account when assessing the relative risks and benefits of periodic surveillance colonoscopy in patients with advanced age or comorbidities and a history of treated CRC or colonic adenoma. (See "Surveillance after colorectal cancer resection", section on 'Guidelines from major groups' and "Approach to the patient with colonic polyps", section on 'Surveillance'.)Colorectal cancer mortality after adenoma resection (August 2014)There are limited data regarding the incidence and mortality from colorectal cancer in patients who have had colorectal adenomas resected. In a study that included approximately 40,000 patients from a Norwegian population based registry who had undergone resection of a colorectal adenoma, 1273 patients were diagnosed with colorectal cancer during a median follow up of nearly eight years [17]. As compared with the general population, individuals who had undergone resection of one tubular adenoma of any size had a lower colorectal cancer mortality, while those with two or more adenomas, high grade dysplasia, or villous histology had a higher colorectal cancer mortality. Studies are needed to determine if intensive colorectal cancer surveillance reduces colorectal cancer mortality among individuals with high-risk adenomas. (See "Approach to the patient with colonic polyps", section on 'Surveillance'.)PERIOPERATIVE CARE AND ANESTHESIOLOGYEnhanced gram-negative activity of novel antibiotic ceftolazone-tazobactam (January 2015)In 2014, the US Food and Drug Administration approved ceftolozane-tazobactam, a novel intravenous cephalosporin-beta-lactamase inhibitor combination. The combination has broad-spectrum in vitro activity against aerobic and aerobic gram-negative rods, including Pseudomonas aeruginosa and most extended-spectrum-beta-lactamase-producing gram negative organisms. In as yet unpublished clinical trials, clinical cure rates with ceftolozane/tazobactam alone or in combination with metronidazole were similar to those with comparator antibiotics for complicated urinary tract and intra-abdominal infections [18,19]. Efficacy of ceftolozane-tazobactam may be attenuated in patients with renal impairment (estimated GFR <50 mL/min). (See "Combination beta-lactamase inhibitors, carbapenems, and monobactams", section on 'Ceftolozane-tazobactam'.)Approval of the direct factor Xa inhibitor edoxaban (January 2015)The US Food and Drug Administration has approved the oral direct factor Xa inhibitor edoxaban (Savaysa; Lixiana in Japan) for the prevention of stroke in nonvalvular atrial fibrillation and the treatment of venous thromboembolism, based upon earlier randomized trials demonstrating non-inferiority to warfarin [20-22]. Dosing is once daily at a fixed dose without monitoring. There are Boxed Warnings regarding avoidance of edoxaban in patients with atrial fibrillation who have a creatinine clearance >95 mL/minute, spinal/epidural hematoma in patients undergoing neuraxial procedures, and ischemic events following premature discontinuation. (See "Atrial fibrillation: Anticoagulant therapy to prevent embolization" and "Lower extremity deep venous thrombosis: Long-term anticoagulation (10 days to three months)" and "Anticoagulation in acute pulmonary embolism" and "Anticoagulation with direct thrombin inhibitors and direct factor Xa inhibitors", section on 'Edoxaban'.)Enteral versus parenteral nutrition in critically ill patients (October 2014)In critically ill patients, the benefits of enteral nutrition compared with parenteral nutrition are unclear, with small randomized trials suggesting marginal benefit to enteral nutrition in surgical patients. One large multicenter randomized trial compared enteral nutrition with parenteral nutrition in 2400 critically ill patients, most of whom had medical rather than surgical illnesses [23]. There was no difference in mortality or rates of infections between the groups. These findings support the continued use of enteral nutrition in both medical and surgical patients who are critically ill, when feasible. (See "Nutrition support in critically ill patients: An overview", section on 'Enteral versus parenteral'.)Risk of elective noncardiac surgery after acute stroke (September 2014)Elective surgery should be deferred when possible in the setting of an acute stroke, as adverse outcomes are likely to be increased in this setting. In a Danish nationwide cohort study, the risk of major adverse cardiovascular events (ischemic stroke, acute myocardial infarction, and cardiovascular mortality) and 30-day all-cause mortality was significantly higher in patients with a history of recent stroke [24]. Compared with patients without stroke, the risk of major adverse events was highest in the first three months after stroke (odds ratio 14) and appeared to level off after nine months. (See "Perioperative care of the surgical patient with neurologic disease", section on 'Patients with a history of stroke'.)TRAUMA AND BURNSEmergency department thoracotomy in children (October 2014)Among adults, survival after emergency thoracotomy for thoracic trauma approaches 20 percent in patients with isolated stab wounds to the heart but is extremely rare in those with blunt trauma, multiple gunshot wounds to the chest, or no signs of life in the field (≤1 percent for each group). Evidence is more limited for outcomes in children. In an observational study of 316 children (mean age 15 years) who underwent thoracotomy within one hour of emergency presentation and were treated in a level one trauma center, 31 percent of patients survived to discharge, including 19 percent of 70 patients with blunt trauma and 34 percent of those with penetrating trauma [25]. Survival dropped to 5 percent in patients presenting with heart rate ≤70 beats per minute or systolic blood pressure ≤50 mmHg, regardless of trauma type. These data suggest that initial vital signs are more important than type of trauma when deciding whether or not to perform emergency thoracotomy in adolescents. (See "Initial evaluation and management of penetrating thoracic trauma in adults", section on 'Overview and survival' and "Initial evaluation and stabilization of children with thoracic trauma", section on 'Emergency department thoracotomy'.)VASCULAR SURGERYLong-term stroke risk with carotid artery stenting versus endarterectomy for carotid atherosclerotic disease (November 2014)Previous randomized trials comparing carotid artery stenting (CAS) and carotid endarterectomy (CEA) for patients with symptomatic carotid occlusive disease found that the periprocedural (30 day) stroke or death rate was greater with CAS than with CEA, but both methods appeared to achieve similar long-term benefit. Results from the long-term analysis of one of these trials (ICSS) suggest that a greater overall stroke risk with CAS remains after several years, although mainly for non-disabling stroke. In the ICSS trial, more than 1700 adults with recently symptomatic carotid artery stenosis had been randomly assigned to treatment with either CAS or CEA. After a median follow-up of 4.2 years, the cumulative five-year risk of any stroke was higher with CAS (15.2 versus 9.4 percent), but the risk of fatal or disabling stroke was similar with CAS and CEA (6.4 versus 6.5 percent) [26]. (See "Management of symptomatic carotid atherosclerotic disease", section on 'ICSS'.)Uncertain benefit of prophylactic anticoagulation to prevent catheter-related venous thromboembolism in patients with cancer (November 2014)Many patients with cancer have an indwelling central venous catheter, which may increase the risk of venous thromboembolism (VTE). Earlier meta-analyses of randomized trials evaluating prophylactic anticoagulation in this setting did not demonstrate a definitive reduction in catheter-related VTE. However, an updated meta-analysis that included a subsequent large trial found a decreased risk of symptomatic deep vein thrombosis (DVT) with prophylactic heparin and a decreased risk of asymptomatic DVT with low dose warfarin, each compared with no anticoagulation [27]. The effects of prophylactic anticoagulation on mortality and adverse outcomes, such as bleeding, remained uncertain. Given this uncertainty, we continue to suggest against routine prophylactic anticoagulation solely based on the presence of a central venous catheter. Nevertheless, anticoagulation may have a role for some patients for whom a perceived high risk of thrombosis outweighs the risk of bleeding and the burden of anticoagulation. (See "Catheter-related upper extremity venous thrombosis", section on 'Prophylactic anticoagulation' and "Risk and prevention of venous thromboembolism in adults with cancer".)Compression therapy for lower extremity superficial phlebitis (November 2014)Treatment of lower extremity superficial phlebitis with compression stockings alone is not as effective as treatment with compression stockings combined with medical therapy (NSAIDs or anticoagulation). However, it was uncertain whether the addition of compression therapy offered any benefit over medical therapy alone. A small trial randomly assigned 80 patients with lower extremity superficial phlebitis to compression stockings or none [28]. All patients were treated with low molecular weight heparin. Relative to baseline, each group had similar improvements in clinical symptoms and quality of life, but at day seven, the compression therapy group had ultrasound evidence of faster thrombus regression. Thus, we offer compression stockings in addition to medical therapy to patients with lower extremity superficial phlebitis if there are no contraindications, but do not insist on their use if they are not well tolerated. (See "Superficial thrombophlebitis of the lower extremity", section on 'Treatment overview'.)Quality of life with invasive treatment for claudication (September 2014)The initial management of claudication is typically non-invasive, as several studies have demonstrated that exercise therapy results in more durable improvements in walking capacity than percutaneous revascularization. However, effect of treatment on other limitations may also be important.  In a trial in which quality-of-life was a primary outcome measure, 158 patients with moderate claudication were randomly assigned to noninvasive or invasive treatment (mostly percutaneous, but also surgical revascularization) [29]. All patients received structured exercise instruction and usual medical therapy for the treatment of peripheral artery disease. Although the change in maximum walking distance was similar between the groups, quality-of-life scores and pain-free walking distance were significantly improved in the invasive compared with the noninvasive group. Until further data are available, however, noninvasive management remains the preferred initial therapy for most patients with claudication. (See "Management of claudication", section on 'Initial medical therapy'.)Injectable progestins and risk of venous thrombosis (September 2014)In contrast to other progestin-only contraceptives, depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA) use may be associated with an increased risk of venous thrombosis and embolism (VTE). In a case-control study, women with a first episode of VTE were twice as likely to be DMPA users than were controls in the general population [30]. In this study, VTE was not associated with use of progestin-only pills, the levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine device, or the progestin-only contraceptive implant. However, in the absence of data about absolute risk of VTE in DMPA users, we continue to think that the advantages of using DMPA generally outweigh the risks for women with a history of VTE. (See "Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate for contraception", section on 'Cardiovascular risk'.)Alcohol consumption and risk of abdominal aortic aneurysm (August 2014)Moderate alcohol consumption has been associated with decreased risk of cardiovascular diseases, but there is limited information regarding an association with abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA), for which some risk factors are distinct from those for atherosclerosis. A study of more than 80,000 men and women evaluated incident clinical events related to AAA (ie, new diagnoses made for clinical reasons beyond routine screening or complications of existing AAA) relative to self-reported alcohol consumption over a 14-year period [31]. Compared with the consumption of one glass of alcohol per week, the AAA risk was lower among men who consumed 10 glasses per week and women who consumed 5 glasses per week. However, an earlier observational study in men reported an increased risk, and as such, additional data are warranted before recommendations on alcohol consumption with regards to risk of AAA development or complication can be made. (See "Epidemiology, risk factors, pathogenesis and natural history of abdominal aortic aneurysm", section on 'Negative risk factors'.)OTHER SURGICAL SPECIALTIESImpact of case volume at treatment centers on survival in head and neck cancer (January 2015)The optimal management of head and neck cancer requires a multidisciplinary approach, including surgeons, medical oncologists, and radiation oncologists, as well as dentists, speech/swallowing pathologists, dieticians, and rehabilitation therapists. An analysis of survival from a large randomized trial found that patients treated at centers with historically high numbers of patients accrued into head and neck clinical trials had a better five-year overall survival rate compared with patients treated at centers with historically low trial accrual [32]. Complex cases of head and neck cancer should be treated at high-volume centers whenever possible, where expertise in each of these disciplines may be better represented. (See "Overview of treatment for head and neck cancer", section on 'Integrated approach to management'.)Mutational analysis of thyroid FNA aspirates (December 2014)When thyroid nodule aspirate results show follicular lesion/atypia of undetermined significance or follicular neoplasm, the results are often called indeterminate. The risk of malignancy with these cytologic classifications ranges from 5 to 32 percent, and the majority of these patients undergo diagnostic thyroid surgery, although benign disease is ultimately confirmed in 75 to 95 percent of patients undergoing surgery. New approaches aim to improve the assessment of indeterminate aspirates. In a study using a next-generation sequencing assay with an expanded panel of point mutations and gene fusions that occur in thyroid cancer, 143 nodule aspirates with follicular neoplasm cytology and surgical follow-up (39 of which were malignant) were analyzed [33]. The expanded panel had a negative predictive value for malignancy of 96 percent and a positive predictive value of 83 percent. The routine use of molecular analysis for indeterminate FNA aspirates may reduce the number of patients who are referred for diagnostic thyroid surgery. (See "Diagnostic approach to and treatment of thyroid nodules", section on 'Mutational analysis'.)How to keep a cast dry (August 2014)Keeping a cast dry can be challenging, but the various methods used to accomplish this are rarely studied. According to an observational laboratory study comparing six approaches, one effective and inexpensive method for maintaining a dry cast is to enclose the cast in two plastic bags, one over the other, and seal each bag to the skin with duct tape (picture 1) [34]. This approach was substantially more effective than using a single plastic bag sealed with either a rubber band or duct tape, and equally effective as expensive commercial products. (See "General principles of definitive fracture management", section on 'Complications'.)Perioperative asymptomatic bacteriuria and prosthetic joint infection (August 2014)Some clinicians screen and treat for asymptomatic bacteriuria prior to joint arthroplasty, but evidence to support this practice is lacking. Although asymptomatic bacteriuria was associated with subsequent prosthetic joint infection in a prospective study of nearly 2500 patients undergoing total hip or knee arthroplasty, treatment of the bacteriuria, which was at the discretion of the clinician, was not associated with a decreased risk of infection [35]. Furthermore, the organisms isolated from the urine were not the same as those from the surgical site infection in any patient. Although asymptomatic bacteriuria may be a marker for individuals at higher risk for subsequent prosthetic joint infection, it appears unlikely to be causative. We do not routinely perform urinalysis or culture in patients without urinary symptoms prior to or following joint arthroplasty. (See "Approach to the adult with asymptomatic bacteriuria", section on 'Patients undergoing joint arthroplasty'.)Risk of prostate cancer following vasectomy (July 2014)Some observational studies have identified a small increased risk of prostate cancer in men with prior vasectomy. In the prospective Health Professionals Follow-up Study (HPFS), the most extensive study to date, almost 50,000 men were followed for over 24 years [36]. Vasectomy was associated with a small increased relative risk of prostate cancer (RR, 1.10) and an increased risk of high-grade, advanced, or lethal prostate cancer. However, the cumulative incidence of lethal prostate cancer was low at 1.6 percent over the 24-year period. Thus, the increased relative risk for prostate cancer translated to small increases in absolute risk. In addition, observational studies can demonstrate an association, but do not prove causation. As such, we agree with the American Urological Society guidelines, which state clinicians do not need to routinely discuss prostate cancer in pre-vasectomy counseling. (See "Overview of vasectomy", section on 'Prostate cancer'.)
		
